BHAGAVAD GITA





Complete Bhagavad Gita In Simple English To Understand The Divine Song Of God





Copyright © 2021 Bhakti Bhav Publishings

All rights reserved



The characters and events portrayed in this book are fictitious. Any similarity to real persons, living or dead, is coincidental and not intended by the author.



No part of this book may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without express written permission of the publisher.



Library of Congress Control Number: 2018675309

Printed in the United States of America





MESSAGE FROM THE AUTHOR





I am grateful that you have chosen this version of the Bhagavad Gita. I hope the timeless wisdom present in this book will guide you in your spiritual journey. The verses and knowledge present in this ancient scripture have changed my life in a positive way.

Till now, there are numerous versions of the Bhagavad Gita published. Some are too complex to understand, and some are simple yet divine. In this version of the Bhagavad Gita, all the verses and content are from the original Bhagavad Gita and Mahabharata.

I have compiled all the verses from the original Bhagavad Gita and explained their meaning in simple English. I have also added Mahabharata's stories and background for readers to understand and relate to this divine conversation.

I hope you'll take out your valuable time to understand this book and the knowledge inside this book in a much deeper and meaningful way.

Indra Bisht

Author and Translator


✽✽✽





HOW TO READ THIS BOOK?





To facilitate the reader's understanding, I have simplified the meaning of each and every verse.

Also I have mentioned the background stories from Mahabharata and introduced Mahabharata's characters to make the reader aware of what made Lord Krishna present the divine wisdom to Arjuna . If you're already aware of the Mahabharata and its characters, You can directly go to Bhagavad Gita's chapters and skip the background stories.

Also at the beginning of each chapter, I have added a summary and illustrations for readers. They can understand the essence of each chapter even before they start to read past the whole chapter. Based on the content of the, Bhagavad Gita , it is divided into eighteen chapters. It can further be divided into three sections. Section 1 has the first six chapters that describe Karm Yoga or the path of duty. Section 2 has chapters 7 to chapter 12, which glorifies the path of bhakti or loving devotion for God.

These chapters also describe God's opulence as the divine nectar that nourishes devotion.

Section 3 starts from this chapter 13 and expounds upon tattva jnana or knowledge scriptural terms and principles.





WHY THIS BHAGVAD GITA?





B hagavad Gita is the oldest and the most read mythological book worldwide. This sacred book and the wisdom present in this book has changed and guided the life of many legends.

This book's knowledge is not merely limited to the Hindu religion. It is widely utilized by individuals to attain the absolute truth, purpose, and meaning of life. Unlike other scriptures, Bhagwad Gita provides the complete knowledge of self.

The divine lord himself reincarnated into a human form to provide the ultimate truth and wisdom that is mentioned in this Gita.

This sacred book debunks all the myths and provides the ultimate spiritual truth and path of liberation. This book can be considered as the ocean of the true spiritual wisdom.

In this book you'll get to know how Arjuna’s doubts about life and his Dharma disappeared and how he attained true wisdom and self-realization. Arjuna also got to know about the worldly bondages and the actual path to liberation

Unfortunately people who have read this book more than once and still haven’t ingrained the real meaning till now. Many people get the incorrect interpretations and meaning based on their limited or partial understanding. It is suggested to read this epic book more than once and dedicate your priceless time to understand it deeply. Once a person understands the real meaning and the core wisdom of this book, life will never be the same for that person.

This book debunks all the myths and provides the ultimate spiritual truth and path of liberation. This book can be considered as the ocean of the true spiritual wisdom.

However, the core translation is the same and is taken from the original Bhagavad Gita.

Still, I have simplified the Sanskrit Verses into Simple English sentences to make sure the people who aren't much comfortable spell the Sanskrit words; can also spell the verses correctly.

I have also given the exact translation of all the verses below each verse. This will help the reader understand the real meaning behind the verses. I haven't added my interpretation is in the translation to ensure the purity of the verses.


✽✽✽





YOUR FREE GIFT





Krishna Chalisa: Krishna Chalisa With Meaning Of Every Verse

FREE EBOOK





VISIT : https://bhaktibhavpublishings.com/free-book-krishna-chalisa/





OR

SCAN THE QR CODE BELOW





INTRODUCTION





W hile I was growing up in a small village of Uttarakhand , I had hundreds of questions that I use to ask my grandmother and, she had all the answers for even my silliest questions.

But for some questions like, Why you and I are born on this planet? Who created me? Why this world is created in a certain way and similar weird questions. She always suggested me to study Bhagavad Gita . According to her, Bhagavad Gita had all the answers a person is looking for.

She told me that whenever you're confused in life, just read this book, and you'll find all your answers.

At that time, I was not convinced by her devotion and faith in this book. But today, I have a firm belief that this book has all the answers.

Life has many ups and downs, Sometimes we think that we're in control of our life and destiny, and after a while, we might end up thinking the opposite.

Situations like these arise many questions in my mind Is there anyone who is controlling my life? If yes, who's that? Why are we even here? What is the purpose of my life? Where are we going?

After reading Bhagavad Gita, all my questions are answered. I have now attained a different perspective for looking at life and even myself. My every action has now a meaning and a purpose.

Bhagavad Gita is not just an ancient scripture that promotes Hinduism, but the wisdom present in this book is timeless, and you can apply the wisdom of Bhagavad Gita in your life to unlock the mysteries of your own life.

Bhagavad Gita has all the answers for your curiosity about life and existence. Story Of Bhagavad Gita revolves around the epic battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas (Cousins of Pandavas ). This battle was fought in Kurukshetra , popularly known as Mahabharata. It consists of only the dialogues between the divine Lord Krishna and the prince, Arjuna .

It is undoubtedly the most famous scripture among Hindus, and even the scholars and intellectuals from the west have appreciated the wisdom inside it.





The Bhagavad-Gita is an Empire of thought and in its philosophical teachings Krishna has all the attributes of the full-fledged monotheistic deity and the at the same time the attributes of the Upanisadic absolute.

-RALPH WALDO EMERSON





Bhagavad Gita is a part of the epic scripture Mahabharata composed by the great sage Vyasa . Mahabharata recounts a royal dispute's long story that turned into a massive battle.

In this simplified version of Bhagavad Gita , you'll be able to understand the concepts of complex Bhagavad Gita in a much simpler way.

In this version of Bhagavad Gita , you'll discover:

1) Absolute Truth of life that Krishna told Arjuna.

2) Sacred verses and their meanings.

3)The Purpose of life and Success in any endeavor of your life.





Before you start proceeding further to understand Bhagavad Gita's concepts, let's understand why it all started and the people involved in this humungous battle that led lord Krishna to unfold the ultimate truth of life enlightenment for us.

Mahabharata is one of the two epic battles in ancient India; this battle is between two branches of cousins in the Kurukshetra war, for the throne of Hastinapur .

The reason for the battle between these two branches of cousins rooted way before they were even born.


✽✽✽

THE PRELUDE

Shantanu , the emperor of Hastinapur, was married to Ganga . Ganga was the personification of the holy river Ganges. Devarat was virtuous son of Ganga and King Shantanu .

After few years, when Devarat had grown up and become a prince and the claimant of the throne of Hastinapur .

But the destiny had something else already planned. Devarat's father, King Shantanu , fell in love with Satyavati . Satyavati was an adopted daughter of a fisherman's leader Dashraj .

King Shantanu desired to marry Satyavati , but it was not as easy as King Shantanu anticipated. Satyavati's father refused for this relation to prosper and Shantanu and Satyavati's marriage.

The only condition in which the couple could have married was when King Shantanu would commit to giving his throne to the sons and descendants of Satyavati . After listening to Dashraj's condition for his marriage with Satyavati and realizing how it will affect his son's rights from his wife, Ganga . King Shantanu refused this condition.

When the Great Prince Devarat heard about this, he immediately went to Satyavati's house. He asked Satyavati to marry his father and took a vow that he will remain celibate through his life and renounced the throne of Hastinapur forever.

After taking this vow, he took Satyavati to the king's palace so that his father can marry the love of his life. This vow not only changed the course of life of King Shantanu and Satyavati , but it also changed the name of Devarat to Bheeshma, because of this terrible vow.

King Shantanu was pleased and delighted with his son's selfless and brave act. Therefore, he gave a boon to Bheeshma that he can choose the time of his death. That means Bheeshma was in control of his death.

A few years later, Satyavati gave birth to two sons. While the son of king Shantanu and Satyavati were still minors, King Shantanu died. Satyavati and Bheeshma then took over the affairs and management of Hastinapur .

When the sons reached adulthood and were ready to take over the throne's responsibilities, one of the sons died in the battle with Gandharvas . Hence, the royal council decided to pass on the throne to the younger son Vichitravirya .

Bheeshma abducted three beautiful princesses for King Vichitravirya from the neighboring kingdom. The eldest of those princesses refused to marry King Vichitravirya because she was already in love with someone else.

Hence the older princess was let go, But the remaining two princesses were married to the King of Hastinapur — Vichitravirya ;

Everyone expected that King Vichitravirya would be the subsequent claimants of the throne of Hastinapur , and the bloodline of Satyavati will continue to take over the throne.

Soon, Vichitravirya died childless leaving everyone in uncertainty about who will be the next claimant of the throne of Hastinapur . To move the bloodline of Satyavati and ensure that her descendants will only be the claimants of the throne. Satyavati summoned her another son Vyasa.





Vyasa was the son of Satyavati and great sage Prashar ; this was way before Satyavati met Shantanu .

As per the laws at that time, unmarried women's descendants were taken as step-child by the husband of that woman. Hence, because of this law, Vyasa was considered Shantanu and Satyavati's son.Then as per the custom and rituals, the two queens of the late king Vichitravirya gave birth to two sons of Vyasa . The elderly queen gave birth to a blind son Dhritarashtra , and the younger queen gave birth to a healthy son named Pandu . Vyasa also had a third son with the maid of two queens named Vidur .

Bheeshma brought up these princes and the claimants of the throne of Hastinapur . The elder son of Vyasa grew up as the strongest of all princes but was born blind, whereas Pandu grew up and became highly skillful in warfare.

When the time came, and the throne of Hastinapur demanded it’s new king. Pandu was chosen as the person who deserves the throne and the kingdom of Hastinapur . The reason behind this was the disability of his elder brother.

With his immense mental strength and capabilities, Pandu expanded his kingdom and conquered the neighboring countries. Vidur was highly skillful in politics and statesmanship.

The sons of king Pandu were popularly known as Pandavas , whereas the sons of Dhritrashtra were known as Kauravas .

The Pandavas

Like in every story, some good entities, forces, and people stand for truth and justice, and some forces, entities, and people always practice injustice. Similarly, Bhagavad Gita 's foundation revolves around the battle between Pandavas (The protagonists) and Kauravas (The antagonists).





Pandu And Pandavas

Pandu : Pandu was the emperor of Hasitnapur , son of Ambalika and Vichitravirya ; he was a great warrior who had expanded his kingdom when he was on the throne. He belonged to the royal kuru dynasty of Hastinapur .

Pandavas : Pandavas are the main characters of this epic battle of Mahabharata . Pandavas were five brothers, and each brother had developed skills and power that helped him win this epic battle with Lord Krishna's guidance.

These five brothers were:

Yudhishthira : He was the eldest and wisest brother in Pandavas and a skilled warrior, master of the spear fighting and chariot races.

Meaning of his name : One who is calm and unwavering, even in the chaos of war.

Traits Of Yudhishthira:

(i) Man of high values

(ii) Always truthful and stood for what is right

(iii) Extremely patient

(iv) Knowledgeable and Humble.

Bhima : He was the 2nd son of Pandu and the strongest one. Bhima was famous for his massive strength and might. It is believed that his strength was equal to or more than the strength of 1000 elephants.

He was extremely athletic and aggressive in nature. He was naturally a protector for his family and loved ones. He was also trained in science, religion, and administration.

Meaning of his name : Terrible Might

Traits Of Bhima:

(i) Extreme Strength

(ii) Anger and Aggression

(iii) Fearless

(iv) Extraordinary Archer and Wrestler

Arjuna : He was the 3rd son of Pandu , and the main character in Mahabharata and the one whom lord Krishna displayed his universal form.





He was bright and shinning in color. He was extremely skillful and master of nearly all divine and celestial weapons.

Meaning of his name : one who shines like silver.

Traits :

(i) Master of all weapons

(ii) Single-Minded Focus

(iii) Determination

(iv) Passionate

(v) Disciplined

Nakula : Nakula was Pandu's 4th son; Nakula was a great sword fighter and ax fighter, skilled in riding the horse, master of arts and science.

He usually preferred swords over other weapons. He was attractive and humble at the same time. He was considered the most handsome prince at that time.

Meaning of his name : without any kula (i.e., lineage)

Traits of Nakula :

(i) Humble

(ii) Helpful

(iii)Diplomatic

Sahadeva : Youngest of all the Pandavas and the 5th son of Pandu . He was a master in sword fighting, the science of dharma, and religious scriptures. After Yudhishthira , he was crowned as king of Indraprastha.

Meaning of his name : Thousand Gods;

Traits Of Sahadeva :

(i) Mysterious

(ii) Wise

(iii) Man of high values

(iv) Leadership

(v) Focus & Determination


The Kauravas

Dhritarashtra (King): Dhritrastra was the king of Hastinapur (Capital of kuru kingdom) and the elder half-brother of Pandu. Unfortunately, he was blind by birth and later fathered hundred sons (popularly known as Kauravas ).

The throne of Hastinapur was initially passed to Pandu as Dhritarashtra was born blind, but it was passed again to Dhritrastra because of the untimely death of Pandu .

But Dhritarashtra was always threatened to lose the throne in assumptions that one day Pandava s will take it when they reach the age to rule the kingdom. Dhritarashtra planned and schemed cleverly and planted seeds of jealously and hatred in hearts of his sons for Pandavas.

Traits of Dhritarashtra:

(i) Obsession

(ii) Indecisiveness

(iii) Jealousy

(iv) Greed

(v) Egoistic

Duryodhana: The eldest son of King Dhritarashtra and Queen Gandhari , He was crowned as the prince of the Kuru kingdom. He was courageous and a great warrior with the qualities to become a king. But only because of some of his negative traits lead his life to a massive downfall.

Traits of Duryodhana:

(i) Loyalty

(ii) Discipline

(iii)Leadership

(iv)Camaraderie

(v) Hate

(vi) Jealousy

Karna : Karna , popularly known as Daanvir Karna . He was courageous, fearless, and a great warrior. He was the spiritual son of Surya (Sun God) and Kunti . Karna was secretly born to Kunti when she was a teenager, and because of society's fear, she had to abandon Karna in a basket on the river Ganges. He was raised by his foster parents Radha and Adhiratha Nandana . Karna grew up as a strong, skillful warrior with almost all divine weapons.

Karna 's traits and characteristics:

(i) Philanthropist

(ii) Humble

(iii) Man of words

(iv) Mentally Strong

(v) Determined

(vi) Disciplined

(vii) Ultimate warrior

(viii) Loyal

Kauravas : Kauravas were the hundred sons of King Dhritarashtra and Gandhari . Duryodhana led Kauravas , and their purpose was to kill Pandavas . Kauravas made countless attempts to murder the Pandavas on various occasions. They were ignoring the wise suggestions of Bheeshma , Uncle Vidura , and Guru Dronacharya . But Krishna was always there to protect the Pandavas . Hence, Duryodhana always failed to kill Pandavas .

The army of Kauravas had all the great warriors, and their only purpose was to defeat the Pandavas . Pandavas only had Krishna and his divine guidance. Under the guidance of Krishna , Pandavas thrived the whole battle.

Kauravas and Pandavas were raised and trained together under the greatest guru— Dronacharya . Guru Dronacharya trained these princes with care and the right teachings.

While the Kauravas and Pandavas were being trained under the great teacher's guidance, the bitterness between the Kauravas and Pandavas started to develop.

There were many reasons for the animosity; some of them were:

The throne of Hastinapur rightfully belonged to the father of Kauravas , but because of his disability, it was given to Pandu . This developed hatred in the hearts of Kauravas for Pandavas .

Pandavas were more skillful in the art of warfare than their cousins—Kauravas .

Pandavas were well versed with Vedas and Puranas . Hastinapur respected Pandavas more than the Kauravas because the Pandavas were humble and kind-hearted.

Arjuna , 3rd son of king Pandu , was the favorite student of Guru Dronacharya .

All the characters and their actions contributed to the epic Mahabharata , and eventually, lord Krishna revealing the ultimate wisdom to Arjuna .

About Lord Krishna : Krishna is the supreme god and lord

Vishnu 's eighth incarnation. He is the god of tenderness, love, and compassion.





Son of Vasudev and Devaki and king of Surasena kingdom. Krishna was the nephew of Pandu’s wife, queen Kunti , and cousin of Pandavas . Krishna was not an ordinary king but was descended to earth to establish Dharma principles.

Because of his righteous behavior and inclination towards truth and Dharma , he was always a well-wisher of Pandavas .


✽✽✽





PART I





CHAPTER 1





BEWILDERMENT OF ARJUNA

(SAINYA DARSANA)





B hagavad Gita , also known as the song of god. This song of god is the conversation between the supreme Lord Shri Krishna and the warrior Arjuna . The conversation is in the middle of the battlefield, where Arjuna refuses to fight his cousins and relatives.

The first chapter is dedicated to King Dhritarashtra and Sanjay 's conversation. Dhritarashtra is eager to know what's happening on the battlefield. Sanjaya —Minister of King Dhritarashtra , was blessed with divine vision and could see and hear events that are happening in distant places, is helping his king by telling whatever is happening on the battlefield of Kurukshetra .


✽✽✽

VERSE 1.1

dhritarashtra uvacha

dharma-kshetre kuru-kshetre samaveta yuyutsavah mamakah panḍavashchaiva kimakurvata samaya

Translation : Dhritrastra asked sanjaya , after assembling with enthusiasm to fight at kurushetra , what did my sons (kauravas ) and pandavas do?





VERSE 1.2

sanjaya uvacha

drishtva tu panḍavanikam vyuḍham duryodhanastada acharyamupasangamya raja vachanamabravit

Translation :Oh, My Emperor, your son Duryodhana after observing Pandava 's army, approached his mentor Dronacharya and spoke as follows.





VERSE 1.3

pashyaitam panḍu-putranam acharya mahatim chamum vyuḍham drupada-putrena tava shishyena dhimata

Translation : Duryodhana said: Oh, my respected teacher,Behold!The well-arranged military formation of the Pandava's mighty army is arranged by your gifted disciple, Dhirstadyumna, The son of Drupad.





VERSE 1.4

atra shura maheshvasa bhimarjuna-sama yudhi yuyudhano viratashcha drupadashcha maha-rathah

Translation :In their ranks, there are great warriors and archers like yuyudhan , Virat , and mighty charioteer Drupad who are equally powerful to Bhima and Arjuna .





VERSE 1.5

dhrishtaketushchekitanah kashirajashcha viryavan purujit kuntibhojashcha shaibyashcha nara-pungavah

Translation : In their ranks, there are great heroes such as Dhrishtaketu , Chekitan , the heroic King of Kashi , Purujit , Kuntibhoj , and Shaibya —all the are best of the best men.





VERSE 1.6

yudhamanyushcha vikranta uttamaujashcha viryavan saubhadro draupadeyashcha sarva eva maha-rathah

Translation :They also have the mighty Yudhamanyu , the courageous and fearless Uttamauja , son of Subhadra , and the sons of Draupadi , who are all great chariot warriors.





VERSE 1.7

asmakam tu vishishta ye tannibodha dwijottama nayaka mama sainyasya sanjnartham tanbravimi te

Translation : O best of brahmins , you must know who amongst my armed forces has the ability to lead.





VERSE 1.8

bhavanbhishmashcha karnashcha kripashcha samitinjayah ashvatthama vikarnashcha saumadattis tathaiva cha

Translation :There are personalities like you, Bheeshma , Karna , Kripa , Ashwatthama who are always victorious in battle.





VERSE 1.9

anye cha bahavah shura madarthe tyaktajivitah nana-shastra-praharanah sarve yuddha-visharadah

Translation : All these warriors are equipped with various kinds of weapons and are skilled in warfare; all are ready to give up their lives for me.





VERSE 1.10

aparyaptam tadasmakam balam bhishmabhirakshitam paryaptam tvidametesham balam bhimabhirakshitam

Translation :Our Army is safely protected by the unlimited might of Bheeshma Pitamah . However, the strength of Pandavas protected by Bhima is limited.





VERSE 1.11

ayaneshu cha sarveshu yatha-bhagamavasthitah bhishmamevabhirakshantu bhavantah sarva eva hi

Translation : Therefore, I call the Kaurava army generals to support Bheeshma , and even you have to support and protect Bheeshma and defend all the strategic points.





VERSE 1.12

tasya sanjanayan harsham kuru-vriddhah pitamahah simha-nadam vinadyochchaih shankham dadhmau pratapavan

Translation :Bheeshma , the fearless, courageous, and glorious grand older man of the Kuru dynasty, blew his conch shell loudly like a lion, increasing Duryodhana 's euphoria.





VERSE 1.13

tatah shankhashcha bheryashcha panavanaka-gomukhah sahasaivabhyahanyanta sa shabdastumulo ’bhavat

Translation : After that, conches, drums, trumpets, bugles, and horns all suddenly blared and rose like thunder, and the sound was overwhelming.





VERSE 1.14

tatah shvetairhayairyukte mahati syandane sthitau madhavah panḍavashchaiva divyau shankhau pradadhmatuh

Translation :From the other side of the battlefield, both Shri Krishna and Arjuna sitting on a glorious and wonderful chariot drawn by white horses blew their divine conches.





VERSE 1.15

panchajanyam hrishikesho devadattam dhananjayah paunḍram dadhmau maha-shankham bhima-karma vrikodarah

Translation : Shri Krishna blew his conch shell, called Panchajanya . Arjuna blew his conch called Devadatta. Bhima , the performer of mighty and courageous tasks, blew his conch-shell called Paundra .





VERSE 1.16 -1.18

anantavijayam raja kunti-putro yudhishthirah nakulah sahadevashcha sughosha-manipushpakau

kashyashcha parameshvasah shikhanḍi cha maha-rathah dhrishtadyumno viratashcha satyakish chaparajitah drupado draupadeyashcha sarvashah prithivi-pate saubhadrashcha maha-bahuh shankhandadhmuh prithak prithak

Translation :King Yudhishthira , son of Kunti, blew his conch shell Ananta-Vijaya . At the same time, Nakula and Sahadeva blew their conches called Sughosh and Manipushpak .

The great archer and the king of Kashi, an exceptional chariot warrior Shikhandi , Dhirstadyumna , Virat , and the invincible Satyaki , Drupada , the sons of Draupadi , and the mighty Abhimanyu , son of Subhadra all blew their conch shells.


VERSE 1.19

sa ghosho dhartarashtranam hridayani vyadarayat nabhashcha prithivim chaiva tumulo abhyanunadayan

Translation :The sound thundered throughout the sky and the earth and shattered the hearts of sons of your sons, O emperor Dhritarashtra.





VERSE 1.20

atha vyavasthitan drishtva dhartarashtran kapi-dhwajah pravritte shastra-sampate dhanurudyamya panḍavah hrishikesham tada vakyam idam aha mahi-pate

Translation :Just as the war is about to begin, Arjuna , whose chariot was decorated with the flag that had Hanuman 's insignia, took up his bow and, observing your sons arrayed against him for battle, spoke to Krishna the following words.



VERSE 1.21-1.22

arjuna uvacha

senayor ubhayor madhye ratham sthapaya me ’chyuta yavadetan nirikshe ’ham yoddhu-kaman avasthitan kairmaya saha yoddhavyam asmin rana-samudyame

Translation :O Infallible one, please take my chariot between both the armies so that I can have a look at the warriors, whom I must fight in this battle.





VERSE 1.23

yotsyamanan avekshe ’ham ya ete ’tra samagatah dhartarashtrasya durbuddher yuddhe priya-chikirshavah

Translation : I want to see who all have come here to fight for the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra .





VERSE 1.24

sanjaya uvacha

evam ukto hrishikesho guḍakeshena bharata senayor ubhayor madhye sthapayitva rathottamam

Translation :O Dhritarashtra, being thus requested by Arjuna , Shri Krishna drew the magnificent chariot between both armies present on the battlefield.





VERSE 1.25

bhishma-drona-pramukhatah sarvesham cha mahi-kshitam uvacha partha pashyaitan samavetan kurun iti

Translation :In front of Bheeshma , Dronacharya , and all the leaders, Shri Krishna said: O Parth , Behold the Kaurava dynasty is assembled here!





VERSE 1.26

tatrapashyat sthitan parthah pitṝin atha pitamahan acharyan matulan bhratrin putran pautran sakhims tatha shvashuran suhridash chaiva senayor ubhayor api

Translation :There, in the middle of two armies, Arjuna could see his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, brothers, maternal uncles, sons, grandsons, father-in- law, and friends.





VERSE 1.27

tan samikshya sa kaunteyah sarvan bandhun avasthitan kripaya parayavishto vishidann idam abravit

Translation :Seeing all his relatives on the battlefield, Arjuna was overwhelmed with a lot of emotions like compassion, love, sorrow, and pity.





VERSE 1.28

arjuna uvacha

drishtvemam sva-janam krishna yuyutsum samupasthitam sidanti mama gatrani mukham cha parishushyati

Translation :Arjuna said: O Krishna , seeing all my relatives arrayed for battle here, my limbs are giving away the strength, and my mouth is drying.





VERSE 1.29 -1.31

vepathush cha sharire me roma-harshash cha jayate ganḍivam sramsate hastat tvak chaiva paridahyate

na cha shaknomy avasthatum bhramativa cha me manah nimittani cha pashyami viparitani keshava

na cha shreyo ’nupashyami hatva sva-janam ahave

Translation :My whole body is shivering; my hair is standing on the end, my skin burns, my mind is confused, and I cannot hold myself and keep my composure, O Krishna—killer of Kesi demon, I can only see devil omen of demons. I can’t see any good in killing my kinsmen in this battle.





VERSE 1.32-1.33

na kankshe vijayam krishna na cha rajyam sukhani cha kim no rajyena govinda kim bhogair jivitena va

yesham arthe kankshitam no rajyam bhogah sukhani cha ta ime ’vasthita yuddhe pranams tyaktva dhanani cha

Translation :I don’t desire any victory, not happiness, by acquiring this great kingdom. Of what use this kingdom and its pleasures. When the persons we desire all this are standing against us on this battlefield.





VERSE 1.34-1.35

acharyah pitarah putras tathaiva cha pitamahah

matulah shvashurah pautrah shyalah sambandhinas tatha etan na hantum ichchhami ghnato ’pi madhusudana

api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh kim nu mahi-krite

Translation :Teachers, Fathers, Sons, Maternal uncles, grandson, father-in-law, grandnephews, brother-in-law, and other relatives present here on this battlefield, ready to jeopardize their kingdom and lives. O Madhusudhana! I don’t want to slay them, even if they're going to slay me. Even if we kill the Kauravas, what satisfaction will we get from domination over the three worlds?





VERSE 1.36-1.37

nihatya dhartarashtran nah ka pritih syaj janardana papam evashrayed asman hatvaitan atatayinah

tasman narha vayam hantum dhartarashtran sa-bandhavan sva-janam hi katham hatva sukhinah syama madhava

Translation : O maintainer of all the living entities, Misfortune and sin will eventually come to us if we kill them. It is not appropriate if we kill Dhritrastra's sons; what pleasure would we feel after killing the sons of Dhritarashtra ?





VERSE 1.38-1.39

yady apy ete na pashyanti lobhopahata-chetasah

kula-kshaya-kritam dosham mitra-drohe cha patakam katham na jneyam asmabhih papad asman nivartitum kula-kshaya-kritam dosham prapashyadbhir janardana

Translation :Although their thoughts are dominated by greed, and they see no wrong in betraying one’s friend and see no offense in murdering one’s relatives, why should we engage in all this, Knowing all the consequences of this?





VERSE 1.40

kula-kshaye pranashyanti kula-dharmah sanatanah dharme nashte kulam kritsnam adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

Translation :When a dynasty gets destroyed, its traditions are thrashed, and the rest of the family is involved in irreligious activities.





VERSE 1.41

adharmabhibhavat krishna pradushyanti kula-striyah strishu dushtasu varshneya jayate varna-sankarah

Translation :O Krishna , when unrighteousness prevails, then the women of the family become immoral, and when the women are degraded, unwanted offspring are born as a result.





VERSE 1.42

sankaro narakayaiva kula-ghnanam kulasya cha patanti pitaro hy esham lupta-pinḍodaka-kriyah

Translation :All these undesirable off springs create a hellish life for both family and the destroyer of the family. Because of these offsprings, all their ancestors also fall because of the lack of ceremonial libations.





VERSE 1.43

doshair etaih kula-ghnanam varna-sankara-karakaih utsadyante jati-dharmah kula-dharmash cha shashvatah

Translation :The evil deeds of those who ruin families thus give rise to unwanted progeny, variety of social and family welfare are ruined.





VERSE 1.44

utsanna-kula-dharmanam manushyanam janardana narake ‘niyatam vaso bhavatityanushushruma

Translation :O Janardhana ! I have heard that those who destroy the family of others reside in hell forever.





VERSE 1.45-1.46

aho bata mahat papam kartum vyavasita vayam

yad rajya-sukha-lobhena hantum sva-janam udyatah yadi mam apratikaram ashastram shastra-panayah dhartarashtra rane hanyus tan me kshemataram bhavet

Translation : It will be much better if Dhritarashtra's son will kill me unarmed and unresisting on this battlefield.





VERSE 1.47

sanjaya uvacha

evam uktvarjunah sankhye rathopastha upavishat visrijya sa-sharam chapam shoka-samvigna-manasah

Translation :Sanjaya said: Having thus spoken these words, Arjuna put aside his bow and arrow and sat on the seat of the chariot with a heavy heart filled with sorrow.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 2





THE ULTIMATE TRUTH OF LIFE

(SANKHYA YOGA)





I n this chapter, Arjuna again tells l ord Krishna why he cannot fight, why he lacks the motivation to take action. Arjuna is overwhelmed with many emotions and refuses to slay his elders, cousins, and teachers on the other end of the battlefield. Seeing Arjuna overwhelmed with so many negative emotions and thoughts, Lord Krishna decides to reveal life's ultimate wisdom and truth.

The divine lord begins with the eternal and imperishable nature of the soul. Lord Krishna explains how death only demolishes the physical body and how the immortal soul continues its journey.

Initially, Lord Krishna tries to motivate the warrior Arjuna at a surface level. But later in the chapter, the divine lord explains the nature and science of Karma deeply.

After that, the divine lord explains why it is essential for Arjuna to follow the path of Dharma . Lord explains the social responsibility of Arjuna as a warrior. Lord also describes how a person who follows the path of Dharma can attain the higher celestial abodes.





VERSE 2.1

sanjaya uvacha

tam tatha kripayavishtamashru purnakulekshanam vishidantamidam vakyam uvacha madhusudanah

Translation : Sanjaya said: Seeing the Arjuna whose heart was overwhelmed with grief and pity and eyes full of tears.





VERSE 2.2

shri bhagavan uvacha

kutastva kashmalamidam vishame samupasthitam anarya-jushtamaswargyam akirti-karam arjuna

Translation :Lord Krishna said: how has this delusion has overcome you in this crucial moment. This is not suitable for an honorable man, nor does it leads to higher abodes, but only causes disgrace.





VERSE 2.3

klaibyam ma sma gamah partha naitat tvayyupapadyate kshudram hridaya-daurbalyam tyaktvottishtha parantapa

Translation :Lord Shri Krishna said: O Partha , Give up this unmanliness! It doesn’t befit you. O vanquisher of enemies, get up and give up these weaknesses of the heart.





VERSE 2.4

arjuna uvacha

katham bhishmam aham sankhye dronam cha madhusudana

ishubhih pratiyotsyami pujarhavari-sudana

Translation : Arjuna replied: How can I attack such respected men like Bheeshma and Dronacharya worthy of worship? O destroyer of enemies!





VERSE 2.5

gurunahatva hi mahanubhavan

shreyo bhoktum bhaikshyamapiha loke hatvartha-kamamstu gurunihaiva bhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan

Translation :It would be better to live on this world begging than to kill these noble elders and enjoy life. If we kill them all, all the pleasures we would enjoy will be tainted with blood.





VERSE 2.6

na chaitadvidmah kataranno gariyo yadva jayema yadi va no jayeyuh yaneva hatva na jijivishamas

te ’vasthitah pramukhe dhartarashtrah

Translation :I don’t know what is good for us - conquer them or being conquered by them. Even after killing them, I will have no desire to live.



VERSE 2.7

karpanya-doshopahata-svabhavah prichchhami tvam dharma-sammuḍha-chetah yach-chhreyah syannishchitam bruhi tanme shishyaste ’ham shadhi mam tvam prapannam

Translation :I am weakening as a warrior and getting confused about my duties. I am your disciple, and I am surrendering to you. Please instruct me.





VERSE 2.8

na hi prapashyami mamapanudyad

yach-chhokam uchchhoshanam-indriyanam avapya bhumav-asapatnamriddham rajyam suranamapi chadhipatyam

Translation :Even if I get a prosperous kingdom beyond comparison or the power of the celestial gods, I will still be unable to remove this grief.





VERSE 2.9

sanjaya uvacha

evam-uktva hrishikesham guḍakeshah parantapa na yotsya iti govindam uktva tushnim babhuva ha

Translation :Sanjaya said: Having said Shri Krishna , —the conqueror of enemies, Arjuna declared to Krishna , “Govind, I will not fight!” and became silent.





VERSE 2.10

tam-uvacha hrishikeshah prahasanniva bharata senayorubhayor-madhye vishidantam-idam vachah

Translation :O Dhritarashtra , thereafter, in the middle of both the armies, Shri Krishna smiled and spoke the following words to Arjuna , who was grief-stricken.





VERSE 2.11

shri bhagavan uvacha

ashochyan-anvashochas-tvam prajna-vadansh cha bhashase gatasun-agatasunsh-cha nanushochanti panḍitah

Translation : Bhagawan Shri Krishna said: While you speak like a wise man, you are grieving for that which is not worthy of grief. The wise never cry/lament for the living and the dead.





VERSE 2.12

na tvevaham jatu nasam na tvam neme janadhipah na chaiva na bhavishyamah sarve vayamatah param

Translation :From the begging of time, there was never a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these warriors and kings, nor shall we ever cease to live in the future.





VERSE 2.13

dehino ’smin yatha dehe kaumaram yauvanam jara tatha dehantara-praptir dhiras tatra na muhyati

Translation :Just as the soul passes through the transformation of bodies from childhood, youth, and then old age, similarly, the soul passes into another body. The wise never gets deluded by this transformation.





VERSE 2.14

matra-sparshas tu kaunteya shitoshna-sukha-duhkha-dah agamapayino ’nityas tans-titikshasva bharata

Translation :O son of Kunti , the contact between the senses and the sense objects creates sensations of cold, heat, pleasure, and distress. These are not permanent, and come and go like seasons, Thus O descendent of Bharata , one must learn to tolerate these sensations.


VERSE 2.15

yam hi na vyathayantyete purusham purusharshabha sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram so ’mritatvaya kalpate

Translation : O Arjuna —Most virtuous amongst men; the person who is not affected by the pleasure and pain and remains undisturbed in both, is certainly ready for liberation.


VERSE 2.16

nasato vidyate bhavo nabhavo vidyate satah ubhayorapi drishto ’nta stvanayos tattva-darshibhih

Translation :Of that which is temporary, there is no eternal existence; of that which is eternal, there is no destruction. The seers of the truth have accepted this after observing the nature of both.


VERSE 2.17

avinashi tu tadviddhi yena sarvam idam tatam vinasham avyayasyasya na kashchit kartum arhati

Translation :You must know, the individual consciousness that pervades the entire body is indestructible, and nobody can destroy this imperishable consciousness.





VERSE 2.18

antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah sharirinah anashino ’prameyasya tasmad yudhyasva bharata

Translation :Only the material body is perishable, But the embodied consciousness within is indestructible, eternal, and infinite. Therefore, O descendent of Bharata , Fight!





VERSE 2.19

ya enam vetti hantaram yash chainam manyate hatam ubhau tau na vijanito nayam hanti na hanyate

Translation : The one who thinks consciousness or soul can slay, or the one who thinks consciousness can be slain. Both of them are in ignorance and lack knowledge.





VERSE 2.20

na jayate mriyate va kadachin nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah ajo nityah shashvato ’yam purano

na hanyate hanyamane sharire

Translation :The soul can never take birth, nor does it die. It was never created. It's unborn, eternal, indestructible, and ageless. It is not destroyed even when the material body is destroyed!





VERSE 2.21

vedavinashinam nityam ya enam ajam avyayam katham sa purushah partha kam ghatayati hanti kam

Translation :O, Partha! How can one kill the soul even after knowing that the soul is unborn, imperishable, and immutable?





VERSE 2.22

vasansi jirnani yatha vihaya navani grihnati naro ’parani tatha sharirani vihaya jirnanya nyani sanyati navani dehi

Translation :Just as a person removes old clothes and wears new ones, Similarly soul gives up the old body and accept the new bodies.





VERSE 2.23

nainam chhindanti shastrani nainam dahati pavakah na chainam kledayantyapo na shoshayati marutah

Translation :Weapons can’t cut the soul; fire can’t burn it; water can’t wet it, and air can’t dry it.





VERSE 2.24

achchhedyo ’yam adahyo ’yam akledyo ’shoshya eva cha nityah sarva-gatah sthanur achalo ’yam sanatanah

Translation :The soul is unbreakable and incombustible. It is everlasting and is present, it can’t be changed, and it existed from the beginning of time.





VERSE 2.25

avyakto ’yam achintyo ’yam avikaryo ’yam uchyate tasmadevam viditvainam nanushochitum arhasi

Translation :It is said that the soul is invisible, unchangeable, and inconceivable. After understanding this, it is inappropriate to grieve for the body.



VERSE 2.26

atha chainam nitya-jatam nityam va manyase mritam tathapi tvam maha-baho naivam shochitum arhasi

Translation :Even if you believe that the soul is subject to birth and death, even then, you shouldn’t grieve like that.





VERSE 2.27

jatasya hi dhruvo mrityur dhruvam janma mritasya cha tasmad apariharye ’rthe na tvam shochitum arhasi

Translation :Death is certain for who is born. For the one who dies, rebirth is certain. Therefore, you shouldn’t grieve over the inevitable.





VERSE 2.28

avyaktadini bhutani vyakta-madhyani bharata avyakta-nidhananyeva tatra ka paridevana

Translation :O Bharata , All the living beings unmanifest before birth, manifest in life, and again unmanifest on death. So, what is the reason for grief?





VERSE 2.27

jatasya hi dhruvo mrityur dhruvam janma mritasya cha tasmad apariharye ’rthe na tvam shochitum arhasi

Translation :Death is inevitable for who is born. For the one who dies, rebirth is inevitable. Therefore, you shouldn’t grieve over the inevitable.





VERSE 2.28

avyaktadini bhutani vyakta-madhyani bharata avyakta-nidhananyeva tatra ka paridevana

Translation :O Bharata , All the living beings unmanifest before birth, manifest in life, and again unmanifest death. So, what is the reason for grief?





VERSE 2.29

ashcharya-vat pashyati kashchid enan ashcharya-vad vadati tathaiva chanyah ashcharya-vach chainam anyah shrinoti shrutvapyenam veda na chaiva kashchit

Translation : Some see the soul as astounding; some describe it as astounding, some hear of it as astounding, while others, even after hearing it not know anything about it.





VERSE 2.30

dehi nityam avadhyo ’yam dehe sarvasya bharata tasmat sarvani bhutani na tvam shochitum arhasi

Translation : O Arjuna , the soul within the bodies of all living beings is immortal. Hence you should not mourn for anyone.





VERSE 2.31

swa-dharmam api chavekshya na vikampitum arhasi dharmyaddhi yuddhach chhreyo ’nyat kshatriyasya na vidyate

Translation :Moreover, considering your duty as a warrior, you must not waver, and there’s nothing better for a warrior, to fight a battle that upholds righteousness.





VERSE 2.32

yadrichchhaya chopapannam swarga-dvaram apavritam sukhinah kshatriyah partha labhante yuddham idrisham

Translation :O Partha , fortunate are the warriors who get such opportunities to engage in a war to defend righteousness, which has come of its own to you, as an open the door to higher celestial abodes.





VERSE 2.33

atha chet tvam imam dharmyam sangramam na karishyasi tatah sva-dharmam kirtim cha hitva papam avapsyasi

Translation :But if you decide not to take part in this battle for righteousness, abandon your social duty and dharma principles. You will definitely incur sin.





VERSE 2.34

akirtim chapi bhutani kathayishyanti te ’vyayam sambhavitasya chakirtir maranad atirichyate

Translation :People will think and believe that you were a coward, and for a respectable warrior, infamy is worse than death.





VERSE 2.35

bhayad ranad uparatam mansyante tvam maha-rathah yesham cha tvam bahu-mato bhutva yasyasi laghavam

Translation :The great generals and warriors will think that you ceased and fled out of fear from the battlefield. And eventually will lose respect for you.





VERSE 2.36

avachya-vadansh cha bahun vadishyanti tavahitah nindantastava samarthyam tato duhkhataram nu kim

Translation :Your enemies will definitely defame you with unpleasant words, condemning you might. Alas, what could be more painful for you than that?





VERSE 2.37

hato va prapsyasi swargam jitva va bhokshyase mahim tasmad uttishtha kaunteya yuddhaya krita-nishchayah

Translation :O son of Kunti , even if you fight and get defeated, you will attain the higher celestial abode, and if you win, you’ll enjoy the victory and the kingdom on earth. Therefore, Arise with determination and fight!





VERSE 2.38

sukha-duhkhe same kritva labhalabhau jayajayau tato yuddhaya yujyasva naivam papam avapsyasi

Translation :Fight for the duty, treat happiness and distress, loss and gain, victory and defeat equally. Fulfilling your duty this way, you will not incur sin.





VERSE 2.39

esha te ’bhihita sankhye buddhir yoge tvimam shrinu buddhya yukto yaya partha karma-bandham prahasyasi

Translation :O Arjuna , I have revealed to you the knowledge of soul and consciousness called the Sankhya yoga or the analytical knowledge.

Now Partha , I will reveal buddhi yoga to you, which is also known as the yoga of intellect. When you act upon this knowledge, you’ll release yourself from the bondage of karma .





VERSE 2.40

nehabhikrama-nasho ’sti pratyavayo na vidyate svalpam apyasya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat

Translation :Acting with this state, one will have no loss, and even the slightest of effort can save one from the greatest fears and dangers.





VERSE 2.41

vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-shakha hyanantash cha buddhayo ’vyavasayinam

Translation :O descendant of kurus , the intellect of those who are on this spiritual path has a one-pointed focus. While the intellect of those who desire the mundane enjoyment is many-branched.





VERSE 2.42-2.43

yamimam pushpitam vacham pravadanty-avipashchitah veda-vada-ratah partha nanyad astiti vadinah kamatmanah swarga-para janma-karma-phala-pradam kriya - vishesha-bahulam bhogaishwarya-gatim prati

Translation :O Partha , those who have limited intelligence misinterpret the holy Vedas and only get attracted to those words of Vedas that are pleasing to their senses, and they presume that there is no higher divine principle in them. This happens because of their selfish desire to attain the higher celestial abodes, higher birth, wealth, power, and sensual enjoyment.





VERSE 2.44

bhogaiswvarya-prasaktanam tayapahrita-chetasam vyavasayatmika buddhih samadhau na vidhiyate

Translation :With their minds attached to the mundane pleasures, they cannot fix their minds on the path of god.





VERSE 2.45

trai-gunya-vishaya veda nistrai-gunyo bhavarjuna nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-kshema atmavan

Translation :The Vedas deals with three modes of material nature. O Arjuna , rise above from duality to a state of pure spiritual consciousness, without the pursuit of gain and safety, and thus you will transcend these three modes.





VERSE 2.46

yavan artha udapane sarvatah samplutodake tavansarveshu vedeshu brahmanasya vijanatah

Translation :Like a large lake can fulfill the purpose served by the small well. Similarly, the knower of the absolute truth can easily realize all the purposes found in Vedas .





VERSE 2.47

karmany-evadhikaras te ma phaleshu kadachana

ma karma-phala-hetur bhur ma te sango ’stvakarmani

Translation :Your right is to perform your duty and your work, you are not the cause of the results of your actions, nor should you get attached to inaction.



VERSE 2.48

yoga-sthah kuru karmani sangam tyaktva dhananjaya siddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutva samatvam yoga uchyate

Translation :O Dhananjaya , Perform your duties and abandon your attachments from the results, i.e., Success and failure; such a balance is known as yoga.





VERSE 2.49

durena hy-avaram karma buddhi-yogad dhananjaya buddhau sharanam anvichchha kripanah phala-hetavah

Translation :O Dhananjaya , seek shelter in divine knowledge and discards behaviors that are reward- seeking. Those who are motivated by

fruitive results are misers.





VERSE 2.50

buddhi-yukto jahatiha ubhe sukrita-dushkrite tasmad yogaya yujyasva yogah karmasu kaushalam

Translation :A wise man will always practice the work without getting attached to the outcomes; Whether it's good or bad. That's Yoga. Therefore, practice yoga and strive for it; yoga is the art of working skillfully.





VERSE 2.51

karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi phalam tyaktva manishinah janma-bandha-vinirmuktah padam gachchhanty-anamayam

Translation :The wise don’t attach themselves to the results of their actions. Thus they free themselves up from the vicious cycle of birth and death. They choose to work at this level of consciousness and hence attain a state free from all the sufferings.





VERSE 2.52

yada te moha-kalilam buddhir vyatitarishyati

tada gantasi nirvedam shrotavyasya shrutasya cha

Translation :Once your intellect surpasses this dense jungle of illusion, you will be indifferent to whatever has been heard and whatever is yet to be heard.





VERSE 2.53

shruti-vipratipanna te yada sthasyati nishchala samadhav-achala buddhis tada yogam avapsyasi

Translation :When your mind and consciousness are no longer affected by the fruitful and alluring sections of Vedas , then you will attain the perfect state of Yoga.





VERSE 2.54

arjuna uvacha

sthita-prajnasya ka bhasha samadhi-sthasya keshava sthita-dhih kim prabhasheta kim asita vrajeta kim

Translation :Arjuna Said: O Keshav , what are the traits and characteristics of a person situated in divine consciousness. How does that person sit? How does he speak, and How does he walk?





VERSE 2.55

s hri bhagavan uvacha

prajahati yada kaman sarvan partha mano-gatan atmany-evatmana tushtah sthita-prajnas tadochyate

Translation :Lord Shri Krishna said: O Partha , when one discards all selfish, materialistic desires and becomes satisfied within, then that person can be considered as situated in divine knowledge.





VERSE 2.56

duhkheshv-anudvigna-manah sukheshu vigata-sprihah vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah sthita-dhir munir uchyate

Translation :The one whose mind remains undisturbed from pain, who doesn’t crave for pleasure, Who is free from all the attachments, fear, and anger is called a sage of steady wisdom.





VERSE 2.57

yah sarvatranabhisnehas tat tat prapya shubhashubham nabhinandati na dveshti tasya prajna pratishthita

Translation :One who is not attached to any condition in this world, the one who not happy and joyful when fortune favors him and not get resentful when the fortune is against him, he is called a sage with perfect knowledge.





VERSE 2.58

yada sanharate chayam kurmo ’nganiva sarvashah indriyanindriyarthebhyas tasya prajna pratishthita

Translation :The one who withdraws senses and stops pleasing his senses, the way a tortoise withdraws its limbs into the shell. Then he has firmly established himself in divine wisdom.





VERSE 2.59

vishaya vinivartante niraharasya dehinah

rasa-varjam raso ’pyasya param drishtva nivartate

Translation :The person can restrain from the objects of enjoyment and pleasure, but the taste for that pleasure always remains within. However, even this taste also stops for those who realize the supreme.





VERSE 2.60

yatato hyapi kaunteya purushasya vipashchitah indriyani pramathini haranti prasabham manah

Translation :These senses are so strong, restless, and unsettled, O son of Kunti , that they can steal the mind of even a wise person who has been practicing self-control.





VERSE 2.61

tani sarvani sanyamya yukta asita mat-parah vashe hi yasyendriyani tasya prajna pratishthita

Translation :A person who fixes his mind in me can fix his mind firmly in the knowledge of the divine.





VERSE 2.62

dhyayato vishayan pumsah sangas teshupajayate sangat sanjayate kamah kamat krodho ’bhijayate

Translation :By constantly meditating on these objects of senses that give temporary pleasure, one becomes attached to it, and attachment flourishes desire. Eventually, desire manifests anger.





VERSE 2.63

krodhad bhavati sammohah sammohat smriti-vibhramah smriti-bhranshad buddhi-nasho buddhi-nashat pranashyati

Translation : Anger clouds the judgment, resulting in confusion; confused memory destroys the intellect, and when the intellect is destroyed, one is destroyed.





VERSE 2.64

raga-dvesha-viyuktais tu vishayan indriyaish charan atma-vashyair-vidheyatma prasadam adhigachchhati

Translation :However, the one who can control his mind, senses and can free himself/herself from the attachments, even while using those sense objects, attains the grace of the divine.





VERSE 2.65

prasade sarva-duhkhanam hanir asyopajayate prasanna-chetaso hyashu buddhih paryavatishthate

Translation :When one attains the grace of the divine, all sorrows and miseries end, and eventually, that person will achieve a tranquil mind and develop divine wisdom.





VERSE 2.66

nasti buddhir-ayuktasya na chayuktasya bhavana

na chabhavayatah shantir ashantasya kutah sukham

Translation :But for an undisciplined person who has no control over his mind and senses. That person can never attain wisdom. Without wisdom, one can never meditate, and without meditation, no one can acquire peace. And how can one be happy without peace of mind?





VERSE 2.67

indriyanam hi charatam yan mano ’nuvidhiyate tadasya harati prajnam vayur navam ivambhasi

Translation :Whichever sense the wavering mind is dominated by, the senses carry intelligence in that direction and get absorbed in that only, just as a strong wind can take a boat easily off its path in the sea.





VERSE 2.68

tasmad yasya maha-baho nigrihitani sarvashah indriyanindriyarthebhyas tasya prajna pratishthita

Translation :Therefore, one whose senses are fully withdrawn from the pleasure of sense objects can easily establish himself/herself in divine wisdom.





VERSE 2.69

ya nisha sarva-bhutanam tasyam jagarti sanyami yasyam jagrati bhutani sa nisha pashyato muneh

Translation :For an introspective sage, what other living beings consider as night becomes day, and what others sage consider as day becomes night.



VERSE 2.70

apuryamanam achala-pratishtham

samudram apah pravishanti yadvat tadvat kama yam pravishanti sarve sa shantim apnoti na kama-kami

Translation :Such a sage is undisturbed by the flow of desires and does not strive to satisfy them attains peace. Similar to an ocean, that remains calm as a river enters into it.





VERSE 2.71

vihaya kaman yah sarvan pumansh charati nihsprihah nirmamo nirahankarah sa shantim adhigachchhati

Translation :The one who gives up all the desires lives free from the sense of greed, possessiveness, and ego attains peace.





VERSE 2.72

esha brahmi sthitih partha nainam prapya vimuhyati sthitvasyam anta-kale ’pi brahma-nirvanam richchhati

Translation :O, Partha ! After attaining the realization of the absolute truth, one is never deluded. If any person is in this state of mind at even the last hour of death, one can be released from this vicious cycle of birth and death and reach the supreme abode of pure consciousness.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 3





THE VIRTUE OF SELFLESS ACTION

(KARMA YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna explains to Arjuna about Karma Yoga . He clearly explains that no one in this entire universe can exist without actions—the material nature forces the beings to act in a certain way.

Lord Krishna had emphasized the Karma Yoga and working as per the responsibilities with detachment from the action's rewards and outcomes.

All prescribed actions are meant to be sacrificed in the name of God without any expectations of fruitful results. Those who are not fulfilling the creator's duties based on the material nature of the living beings are living in vain and ignorance.





VERSE 3.1-3.2

arjuna uvacha

jyayasi chet karmanas te mata buddhir janardana tat kim karmani ghore mam niyojayasi keshava vyamishreneva vakyena buddhim mohayasiva me tad ekam vada nishchitya yena shreyo ’ham apnuyam

Translation :Arjuna said: O Janardan ! If it's your opinion that knowledge is superior to action, then why do you suggest me engaging in such a violent war. Your words seem to contradict, and my mind is confused now. Therefore, please Guide me, which path is beneficial for the highest good.





VERSE 3.3

shri bhagavan uvacha

loke ’smin dvi-vidha nishtha pura prokta mayanagha jnana-yogena sankhyanam karma-yogena yoginam

Translation :Lord Krishna said: O sinless one; Previously I explained two paths present in this world:

Path Of Knowledge : This is for empirical philosophers.

Path Of Action: For those who are inclined towards action.


VERSE 3.4

na karmanam anarambhan naishkarmyam purusho ’shnute na cha sannyasanad eva siddhim samadhigachchhati

Translation :One can’t achieve the freedom and the state of the divine simply by abstaining from the work.

No one can attain the perfection of knowledge simply by physical renunciation.





VERSE 3.5

na hi kashchit kshanam api jatu tishthatyakarma-krit karyate hyavashah karma sarvah prakriti-jair gunaih

Translation :No one can abstain from action, even for a single moment. Indeed, all living creatures are forced to take action by their qualities born of material nature.





VERSE 3.6

karmendriyani sanyamya ya aste manasa smaran indriyarthan vimuḍhatma mithyacharah sa uchyate

Translation :The one who controls the external senses and continues to dwell on sense-objects is said to be hypocrite.



VERSE 3.7

yas tvindriyani manasa niyamyarabhate ’rjuna karmendriyaih karma-yogam asaktah sa vishishyate

Translation :But those who control their senses with the mind, and engage in Karma-yoga without any attachment, are certainly superior.





VERSE 3.8

niyatam kuru karma tvam karma jyayo hyakarmanah sharira-yatrapi cha te na prasiddhyed akarmanah

Translation :You must perform your duties as the action is better than inaction. Even you can’t maintain your body without action.





VERSE 3.9

yajnarthat karmano ’nyatra loko ’yam karma-bandhanah tad-artham karma kaunteya mukta-sangah samachara

Translation :All the work must be done as a sacrifice to the Supreme Lord Vishnu . Otherwise, work creates an attachment in this world. Hence, perform your duties and take action without being attached to the results, Only for the satisfaction of the supreme god.



VERSE 3.10

saha-yajnah prajah srishtva purovacha prajapatih anena prasavishyadhvam esha vo ’stvishta-kama-dhuk

Translation :In the very beginning of creation, Brahma created humankind along with this system of sacrifices and said, “Prosper through these sacrifices, and they shall fulfill all your desires.


VERSE 3.11

devan bhavayatanena te deva bhavayantu vah parasparam bhavayantah shreyah param avapsyatha

Translation :By your sacrifices, demigods will be pleased, and by the mutual cooperation and pleasing each other, you will attain prosperity.


VERSE 3.12

ishtan bhogan hi vo deva dasyante yajna-bhavitah tair dattan apradayaibhyo yo bhunkte stena eva sah

Translation :After getting satisfied with your sacrifice, celestial gods or the demigods will bestow upon you all the necessities of life. But the one who enjoys these things without offering them in return is a thief.



VERSE 3.13

yajna-shishtashinah santo muchyante sarva-kilbishaih bhunjate te tvagham papa ye pachantyatma-karanat

Translation :I The enlightened people, who eat food that is first offered in sacrifice, are released from all kinds of sin. However, others who cook food just for themselves and their enjoyment certainly eat only sins.


VERSE 3.14

annad bhavanti bhutani parjanyad anna-sambhavah yajnad bhavati parjanyo yajnah karma-samudbhavah

Translation :All living creatures subsist on the food, and food is produced by rains, and rain is produced due to the performance of sacrifice, and sacrifice is produced by performing the prescribed duties.





VERSE 3.15

karma brahmodbhavam viddhi brahmakshara-samudbhavam tasmat sarva-gatam brahma nityam yajne pratishthitam Translation :The prescribed actions and duties are mentioned in Vedas, and the Vedas originated from the god himself. Thus, the omnipresent lord is eternally present in the acts of sacrifices.


VERSE 3.16

evam pravartitam chakram nanuvartayatiha yah aghayur indriyaramo mogham partha sa jivati

Translation :O, Partha ! The one who doesn’t believe in the Vedic system and the cycle of sacrifices live only for the delight of their senses and only in the pursuit of pleasure. And thus, live their entire life in vain.





VERSE 3.17

yas tvatma-ratir eva syad atma-triptash cha manavah atmanyeva cha santushtas tasya karyam na vidyate

Translation :However, the one who enjoys in the self, and is fully satisfied in self. For them, there’s no duty.


VERSE 3.18

naiva tasya kritenartho nakriteneha kashchana

na chasya sarva-bhuteshu kashchid artha-vyapashrayah

Translation : Such souls who are fully satisfied in themselves don’t have anything to gain from any action or to lose by their inaction; they don’t depend upon. They don’t rely upon other human beings to fulfill their self-interest.





VERSE 3.19

tasmad asaktah satatam karyam karma samachara asakto hyacharan karma param apnoti purushah

Translation :Therefore, perform your duties perfectly without getting attached to the results, and working without attachments, one can attain the absolute.


VERSE 3.20-3.21

karmanaiva hi sansiddhim asthita janakadayah loka-sangraham evapi sampashyan kartum arhasi yad yad acharati shreshthas tat tad evetaro janah sa yat pramanam kurute lokas tad anuvartate

Translation :In the past, King Janak and others acquired perfection by performing their prescribed duties. Whatever actions great people perform, common people follow those actions. Accordingly, whatever standard they set by their actions, others will follow.




VERSE 3.22

na me parthasti kartavyam trishu lokeshu kinchana nanavaptam avaptavyam varta eva cha karmani

Translation :O, Partha ! I have no duties to perform in all three worlds. I don’t have a scarcity of anything, nor do I need to gain or attain anything. Yet, I am still engaged in my prescribed duties.


VERSE 3.23

yadi hyaham na varteyam jatu karmanyatandritah mama vartmanuvartante manushyah partha sarvashah

Translation :If I avoid my prescribed duties, O Partha , All men will start to avoid their prescribed duties.





VERSE 3.24

utsideyur ime loka na kuryam karma ched aham sankarasya cha karta syam upahanyam imah prajah

Translation :If I stop performing my prescribed duties, all these worlds will fall apart; I will be responsible for the mayhem that would prevail and destroy the human race's peace.



VERSE 3.25

saktah karmanyavidvanso yatha kurvanti bharata kuryad vidvans tathasaktash chikirshur loka-sangraham

Translation :O decedent of Bharata , as ignorant people perform their duties with attachments to the results, Similarly, the wise must act without being attached to the results for all individuals' welfare.





VERSE 3.26

na buddhi-bhedam janayed ajnanam karma-sanginam joshayet sarva-karmaṇi vidvan yuktah samacharan

Translation :The wise must not disagree with the intellect of the ignorant people. Rather, the wise must take actions to inspire the ignorant people to take actions and do their prescribed duties.





VERSE 3.27

prakriteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvashah ahankara-vimuḍhatma kartaham iti manyate

Translation :The three modes of material nature perform all the activities, But the soul, who is deluded by the false identification of the body, thinks and considers itself as the “doer.”


VERSE 3.28

tattva-vit tu maha-baho guna-karma-vibhagayoh guna guneshu vartanta iti matva na sajjate

Translation :O mighty-armed one, enlightened persons distinguish the soul as distinct from Karma and Guna . They perceive that it is only a mode of interacting with one another, and thus that person remains unattached.





VERSE 3.29

prakriter gunasammoodhaah sajjante gunakarmasu taan akritsnavido mandaan kritsnavin na vichaalayet

Translation :The wise must not get sad and bereft by the actions and engagements of those who are puzzled by this materialistic nature and activities.


VERSE 3.30

mayi sarvaani karmaani sannyasyaadhyaatma chetasaa niraasheer nirmamo bhootwaa yudhyaswa vigatajwarah

Translation :Completely surrender to me without any selfish intention, surrender your actions to me and free yourself. Without any grief, fight!



VERSE 3.31

ye me matam idam nityam anutishthanti maanavaah shraddhaavanto'nasooyanto muchyante te'pi karmabhih

Translation :Those enlightened men who will practice all my teachings with full faith without finding faults will be free from all the bondages.


VERSE 3.32

ye twetad abhyasooyanto naanutishthanti me matam sarvajnaanavimoodham staan viddhi nashtaan achetasah

Translation :However, the person who doesn’t follow my teachings and finds out fault in it, out of envy, are deprived of all the knowledge. They have lost the ultimate goal of life and are doomed to destruction.





VERSE 3.33

sadrisham cheshtate swasyah prakriter jnaanavaan api prakritim yaanti bhutani nigrahah kim karishyati

Translation : Even a wise man acts and behaves according to his nature; All living beings act according to their nature, what can repressing yourself do?





VERSE 3.34

indriyasye'ndriyasyaarthe raagadweshau vyavasthitau tayor na vasham aagacchet tau hyasya paripanthinau

Translation : The senses are always attracted to their sense objects, but one must not get swayed by these obstacles; they are his enemies.


VERSE 3.35

shreyaan swadharmo vigunah paradharmaat swanushthitaat swadharme nidhanam shreyah paradharmo bhayaavahah

Translation :It’s better to carry out your own prescribed duties with imperfection rather than performing someone else’s with perfection. It’s better to die doing your duties. The duty of someone else is full of anxiety and danger.





VERSE 3.36

atha kena prayukto'yam paapam charati poorushah anicchannapi vaarshneya balaad iva niyojitah

Translation :Arjuna asked: O Krishna , how can one commit a sin against his will? As if by force?





VERSE 3.37

sri bhagavaan uvaacha kaama esha krodha esha rajoguna samudbhavah mahaashano mahaapaapmaa viddhyenam iha vairinam

Translation :It is desire, the lust that transforms into anger and is manifest from the mode of passion. Know this lust as an enemy and extremely evil in this world.





VERSE 3.38

dhoomenaavriyate vahnir yathaadarsho malena cha yatho'lbenaavrito garbhas tathaa tenedam aavritam

Translation :As the fire envelopes the smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, and as the womb covers an embryo, similarly, the consciousness is enveloped by the desire.





VERSE 3.39

aavritam jnaanam etena jnaanino nityavairinaa kaamaroopena kaunteya dushpoorenaanalena cha

Translation :O Kaunteya (Son of Kunti ). The wisdom is covered by these constant enemies in the form of lust and desires, which is like a fire that cannot be satisfied.





VERSE 3.40

indriyaani mano buddhir asyaadhishthaanam uchyate etair vimohayatyesha jnaanamaavritya dehinam

Translation :The senses, mind, and intellect are its seat, and through these, it deludes the embodied by covering its knowledge and wisdom.





VERSE 3.41

tasmaat twam indriyaanyaadau niyamya bharatarshabha paapmaanam prajahi hyenam jnaana vijnaana naashanam

Translation :Therefore, Oh the best among the Bharatas , You must control the senses first. You must eliminate this lust and desires, as this is the destroyer of knowledge and wisdom.





VERSE 3.42

indriyaani paraanyaahur indriyebhyah param manah manasastu paraa buddhir yo buddheh paratastu sah

Translation :It is said by the wise men that senses are superior to the body, the mind is superior to these senses, intellect is superior to the mind, and superior to intelligence is the consciousness.



VERSE 3.43

evam buddheh param buddhwaa samstabhyaatmaanam aatmanaa jahi shatrum mahaabaaho kaamaroopam duraasadam

Translation :O mighty-armed one, thus knowing the consciousness to be superior to the intellect, steady the mind with the pure intellect of self and destroy the enemy in the form of lust and desire.


✽✽✽





CHAPTER 4





KNOWLEDGE AND ACTION

(JNANA YOGA)





T o establish a strong faith in the knowledge, Lord Shri Krishna reveals the science of yoga to Arjuna . Lord Krishna tells Arjuna that he has passed the same knowledge to the saintly kings and the sun god from the very begging of time.

Arjuna gets confused and asks Lord Krishna about the possibility of Krishna passing the knowledge to others from the beginning of time. Arjuna is perplexed and wonders how a person who is of his age can give knowledge to gods and sages from the beginning of time.

To end the confusion of Arjuna , Shri Krishna tells him about his reincarnation on the planet earth. Then Shri Krishna resumes back to Karma Yoga and its nature.





VERSE 4.1

sri bhagawan uvaacha imam vivaswate yogam proktavan aham avyayam vivaswaan manave praaha manur ikshwaakave'braveet

Translation : Sri Bhagavan said: I passed this eternal knowledge of yoga to Vivasan (The Sun God). Who then taught it to Manu . And Manu then taught it to ikvashvaku.


VERSE 4.2

evam parampara-praptam imam rajarshayo viduh sa kaleneha mahata yogo nashtah parantapa

Translation :O conqueror of enemies, the saintly rulers knew this knowledge of yoga in a continuous succession. But this knowledge of yoga has been lost because of the long lapse of time.


VERSE 4.3

sa evaayam maya te'dya yogah proktah puratanah bhakto'si me sakha cheti rahasyam hyetad uttamam

Translation :I am revealing the secret of the same ancient knowledge of yoga because you are my friend and devotee, and you can understand this metaphysical mystery.


VERSE 4.4

Arjuna uvacha aparam bhavato janma param janma vivaswatah katham etadvijaaneeyaam twam aadau proktavaan iti

Translation :Arjuna said: You were born recently, and the sun god was born long ago, then how am I going to understand that you taught this science of yoga in the beginning?





VERSE 4.5

shri bhagawan uvaacha bahooni me vyateetaani janmaani tava chaarjuna taanyaham veda sarvaani na twam vettha parantapa

Translation : The Supreme Lord ( Bhagavan Shri Krishna ) Said: O Conqueror of enemies, Both you and I have passed many births, while I remember them all but you don’t.





VERSE 4.6

ajo'pi sannavyayaatma bhootanaam eeshwaro'pi san prakritim swaam adhishthaaya sambhavaamyaatmamaayaya

Translation :Although I am unborn, eternal by nature, creator, controller, and lord of all entities, I appear in this universe by my divine power.

VERSE 4.7

yada yada hi dharmasya glaanir bhavati bhaarata abhyutthaanam adharmasya tadaa'tmaanam srijaamyaham

Translation :O Arjuna , Whenever there is the decline of Dharma (Righteousness) and increase of Adharma ( Unrighteousness), I will manifest myself.





VERSE 4.8

paritranaaya saadhoonaam vinashaaya cha dushkritam dharma samsthaapanaarthaaya sambhavaami yuge yuge

Translation : To protect the good, and for the destruction of wicked, and to establish Dharma (Righteousness). I appear on earth age after age.





VERSE 4.9

Janmaa karmaa cha me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah tyaktva deham punarjanma naiti maameti so'rjuna

Translation :The one who understands my divine nature of birth, O Arjuna , He never takes birth again and comes to me and attains me.





VERSE 4.10

veetaraagabhayakrodhaa manmaya maam upaashritaah bahavo jnaana tapasa pootaa madbhaavamaagataah

Translation :Freed from fear, anger, and attachments and absorbed in me, taking refuge in me and purified by the knowledge of me, and thus they attain my being and my divine love.

VERSE 4.11

ye yatha maam prapadyante taamstathaiva bhajaamyaham mama vartmaanuvartante manushyaah paartha sarvashah

Translation :In whatever ways people surrender to me, I reward them accordingly. O Partha , Everyone follows my path, knowingly or unknowingly.





VERSE 4.12

kaangkshantah karmanaam siddheem yajanta iha devataah kshipram hi maanushe loke siddhirbhavati karmajaa

Translation :Those who desire success worship demigods because that leads to quick material success.





VERSE 4.13

chaturvarnyam maya srishtam gunakarma vibhagashah tasya kartaaram api maam viddhyakartaaram avyayam

Translation :I have created four social divisions and categories based on people's material nature, activities, and qualities. Although I am the creator of this, consider me as the non-doer, and I am changeless.





VERSE 4.14

Na maam karmaanee limpanti na me karmaphale sprihaa iti maam yo'bhijaanaati karmabheer na sa badhyate

Translation :Actions and activities do not taint me, nor I desire the results of material actions. The one who knows this is never bound by karma.

VERSE 4.15

evam jnaatwaa kritam karmaa poorvair api mumukshubhih kuru karmaiva tasmaat twam poorvaih poorvataram kritam

Translation :Knowing this, in ancient times, the seekers of liberation performed actions. Thus, following those seekers' footsteps, you must perform your actions.





VERSE 4.17

karmano hyapi boddhavyaam boddhavyam chaa vikarmanah akarmanashcha boddhavyam gahanaa karmano gatih

Translation :One has to understand the prescribed action and what is the wrong action, and what is inaction? The ultimate truth about these is indeed hard to understand.





VERSE 4.18

karmanyakarmaa yah pashyed akarmani cha karmaa yah sa buddhimaan manushyeshu sa yuktah kritsnakarmakrit

Translation :The one who can see the action in inaction and inaction in action is the wisest among humans. He is considered a Yogi and a performer of all actions.





VERSE 4.19

Yasya sarvee samarambhaah kaamasankalpa varjitaah jnaanaagni dagdhakarmaanam tam aahuh panditam budhaah

Translation :The one who performs all the actions without attachments from the materialistic desires and results, the one who burns his actions in fire of divine knowledge, the enlightened sage consider them as wise men.





VERSE 4.20

tyaktwaa karmaphalasangam nityatripto niraashrayah karmanye abhipravritto'pi naiva kinchit karoti sah

Translation : Such wise men have given up the attachments to the fruit of their actions; they are always content and not dependent on external factors and results, even if they are engaged in actions.





VERSE 4.21

niraasheer yatachittaatma tyaktasarvaparigrahah shaariram kevalam karma kurvannaapnoti kilbisham

Translation :Free from expectations and desires, controlling mind and body, such a person incurs no sin, even though they perform actions through their body.





VERSE 4.22

yadricchaalaabhasantushto dwandwaateeto vimatsarah samah siddhaavasiddhau cha kritwaapii na nibadhyatee

Translation :That person becomes content with whatever comes to them; they are free from the dualities of life. They are equipoised with success and failure. They are not bound by actions even while performing actions.


VERSE 4.23

gatasangasya muktasya jnaanaavasthitachetasah yajnaayaacharatah karma samagram pravileeyate

Translation :They are released from the materialistic attachments, and their mind is established in the knowledge of the divine. Since they perform their prescribed actions for the sake of sacrifice, they are freed from all karmic reactions.





VERSE 4.24

Brahma arpanam brahma havir brahmaagnau brahmanaa hutam brahmaiva tena gantavyam brahma karma samaadhinaa

Translation :Free from expectations and desires, controlling mind and body, such a person incurs no sin, even though they perform actions through their body.





VERSE 4.25

daivam evapare yajnam yoginah paryupasate brahmagnavapare yajnam yajnenaivopajuhvati

Translation :Some yogis worship the demigods and perform sacrifices for material offerings. Others offer self as a sacrifice to the fire of the ultimate truth.


VERSE 4.26

shrotradinindriyanyanye sanyamagnishu juhvati shabdadin vishayananya indriyagnishu juhvati

Translation :Some offer senses of hearing, seeing, touching, and other senses in the sacrificial fire of self-control. Others offer sound, form, touch, taste, and others as a sacrifice in the fire of senses.





VERSE 4.27

sarvanindriya-karmani prana-karmani chapare atma-sanyama-yogagnau juhvati jnana-dipite

Translation :Some of them offer the functions of all the senses and the function of their life in the fire of self-purification that is inspired by the knowledge.





VERSE 4.28

dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna yoga-yajnas tathapare swadhyaya-jnana-yajnash cha yatayah sanshita-vratah

Translation :Some people sacrifice their wealth; some study scriptures and Vedas as a sacrifice while undertaking strict vows.





VERSE 4.29-4.30

apane juhvati pranam prane ’panam tathapare pranapana-gati ruddhva pranayama-parayanah apare niyataharah pranan praneshu juhvati sarve ’pyete yajna-vido yajna-kshapita-kalmasah

Translation :Others offer the sacrifice of outgoing breath in the incoming breath, while some offer the sacrifice of incoming breath into outgoing breath. Some practice pranayama and control the incoming and the outgoing breaths in the regulation of the life energy. Some offer their sacrifice by controlling their food intake. All these knowers of the principle of sacrifices have cleansed themselves from their impurities, and thus they attain the eternal truth.





VERSE 4.31

yajna-shishtamrita-bhujo yanti brahma sanatanam nayam loko ’styayajnasya kuto ’nyah kuru-sattama

Translation :Those who are aware of the secret principles of sacrifice and engage themselves in it are satisfied with the remnants that are like nectar, and hence they attain the eternal truth. O best of the kuru dynasty, those who never perform the sacrifice, finds no happiness- in this world or the next one.



VERSE 4.32

evam bahu-vidha yajna vitata brahmano mukhe

karma-jan viddhi tan sarvan evam jnatva vimokshyase

Translation :Similarly, different kinds of sacrifices are explained in Vedas. Understand them as different kinds of work born from the action. Understanding this will liberate you.





VERSE 4.33

shreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj jnana-yajnah parantapa sarvam karmakhilam partha jnane parisamapyate

Translation :O conqueror of enemies, sacrifice performed in this knowledge is the superior form of a sacrifice compared to any kind of material sacrifice. O Partha , all sacrifices of work lead up to knowledge.





VERSE 4.34

tad viddhi pranipatena pariprashnena sevaya upadekshyanti te jnanam jnaninas tattva-darshinah

Translation :Just understand the truth by approaching a self-realized spiritual master who is the seer of truth. Make an inquiry and render service unto him. Such an enlightened person can provide you knowledge because he has seen the truth.





VERSE 4.35

yaj jnatva na punar moham evam yasyasi panḍava yena bhutanyasheshena drakshyasyatmanyatho mayi

Translation :O son of Pandu , once you understand the knowledge, you will never fall to illusion again. Through this, you’ll see and observe the nature of all living beings and realize that they all are part of the supreme and are situated within me.





VERSE 4.36

api ched asi papebhyah sarvebhyah papa-krit-tamah sarvam jnana-plavenaiva vrijinam santarishyasi

Translation : Those who are most immoral, you can cross this ocean of vices and material existence by boarding the boat of wisdom.





VERSE 4.37

yathaidhansi samiddho ’gnir bhasma-sat kurute ’rjuna jnanagnih sarva-karmani bhasma-sat kurute tatha

Translation :As a blazing fire turns wood into ashes, O Arjuna so does the fire of knowledge burns all reactions from the material activities into ashes.





VERSE 4.38

na hi jnanena sadrisham pavitramiha vidyate tatsvayam yogasansiddhah kalenatmani vindati

Translation :There’s nothing pure as this divine knowledge; the one who has attained realizes this and attains the purity of mind through the practice of yoga .





VERSE 4.39

shraddhavan labhate jnanam tat-parah sanyatendriyah jnanam labdhva param shantim achirenadhigachchhati

Translation :Those whose faith is deep, devoted, and senses to attain the divine knowledge. Through such knowledge, they attain supreme peace.

VERSE 4.40

ajnash chashraddadhanash cha sanshayatma vinashyati nayam loko ’sti na paro na sukham sanshayatmanah

Translation :Those who are deluded and possess neither faith nor knowledge, for such sceptical souls, there’s no peace for them , neither in this world nor in the next one.





VERSE 4.41

yoga-sannyasta-karmanam jnana-sanchhinna-sanshayam

atmavantam na karmani nibadhnanti dhananjaya

Translation :O Arjuna , Karma (Action) can’t bind that renounced karma (actions) through the process of yoga , his doubts have been overcome by knowledge, and that person has realized the nature of the self.





VERSE 4.42

tasmad ajnana-sambhutam hrit-stham jnanasinatmanah chhittvainam sanshayam yogam atishthottishtha bharata

Translation :Therefore, with this sword of knowledge, slash these doubts that are in your heart. O Bharata , take refuge of karma yoga , arise, stand up and fight!


✽✽✽





CHAPTER 5

RENUNCIATION

(KARMA SANYASA YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Krishna mentions the Karma Sanyasa Yoga . Supreme god talks about Karm Sanyasi and how they control their senses. How karma Sanyasis free themselves from the external sensory pleasures, fear, pain, anger, and desire.

This chapter also has the comparison between Karma Yoga and Karma Sanyasa Yoga .

Lord Krishna says that both paths led to liberation. Krishna explains why it is difficult to abandon all the actions and only be done by people who have a pure and pristine mind. To attain the purity of the mind, one has to choose the path of karma . Shri Krishna recommends Karma yoga to most people and tells people to work with devotion.

Lord Krishna suggests doing the prescribed worldly duties with devotion without any attachment to the results of their actions.

Karma yogis abstain from enjoying the results of the actions. They see everything and everyone with equality. They are always absorbed and situated in the ultimate truth and wisdom. For Karma yogis , the pleasure never comes from worldly pleasures but from the god who resides in them.

Lord Krishna also mentions about ignorant people attachment to the pleasures of sensory objects.


VERSE 5.1

arjuna uvacha

sannyasam karmanam krishna punar yogam cha shansasi yach chhreya etayor ekam tan me bruhi su-nishchitam

Translation :Arjuna said: You praised the karma Sanyasa (renunciation of action), but then again, you also talk about karma yoga (the way of working with devotion and selfless action). Please tell me clearly which one is the best and most beneficial.





VERSE 5.2

shri bhagavan uvacha

sannyasah karma-yogash cha nihshreyasa-karavubhau tayos tu karma-sannyasat karma-yogo vishishyate

Translation : Shri Bhagawan (Supreme Lord) said: Both the path led to the highest benefit. But karma yoga is superior to Karma sannyasa .





VERSE 5.3

jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi yo na dveshti na kankshati nirdvandvo hi maha-baho sukham bandhat pramuchyates

Translation :The Karma yogis , who are free from hatred and desires, is a true renunciate; he is easily liberated from material bondage.





VERSE 5.4

sankhya-yogau prithag balah pravadanti na panḍitah ekamapyasthitah samyag ubhayor vindate phalam

Translation :Only the ignorant and immature speak of renunciation of actions (karma sannyasa ) and work in devotion (karma yoga ) as different systems. We can achieve the same results after following either of these paths.





VERSE 5.5

yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam tad yogair api gamyate ekam sankhyam cha yogam cha yah pashyati sa pashyati

Translation :The ultimate state that is attained by means of karma sanyas can also be achieved by karma yoga . Those who see both these systems as one actually sees things as they are.





VERSE 5.6

sannyasas tu maha-baho duhkham aptum ayogatah yoga-yukto munir brahma na chirenadhigachchhati

Translation :Perfect renunciation is tough to achieve without performing work in devotion. However, the wise man who performs work in devotion quickly attains the absolute truth.





VERSE 5.7

yoga-yukto vishuddhatma vijitatma jitendriyah sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma kurvann api na lipyate

Translation :The one who controls his mind and senses can see souls in every living being. However, they perform all the actions and are never contaminated.





VERSE 5.8-5.9

naiva kinchit karomiti yukto manyeta tattva-vit pashyan shrinvan sprishanjighrann ashnangachchhan svapanshvasan

pralapan visrijan grihnann unmishan nimishann api indriyanindriyartheshu vartanta iti dharayan

Translation :The one who is the knower of truth, although he is engaged in seeing, hearing, touching, moving, excreting, sleeping, eating, taking, accepting objects, and blinking eyes, always thinks that “I am not the doer”. With this divine knowledge, realizes that it is the material senses that are moving with the respective senses.





VERSE 5.10

brahmanyadhaya karmani sangam tyaktva karoti yah lipyate na sa papena padma-patram ivambhasa

Translation :Those who dedicate their actions to the supreme god detach themselves from worldly attachments and are untouched by all kinds of sins, similar to a lotus that's untouched by the water.





VERSE 5.11

kayena manasa buddhya kevalair indriyair api

yoginah karma kurvanti sangam tyaktvatma-shuddhaye

Translation :The karma yogi , while giving up all attachments, performs all the actions through the medium of body, mind, intellect, and senses simply for the purpose of self-purification.





VERSE 5.12

yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva shantim apnoti naishthikim ayuktah kama-karena phale sakto nibadhyate

Translation :The Karma yogi gives up the result of his actions, attains everlasting peace. At the same time, persons who are attached to the desired results and work with a selfish motive are entangled.


VERSE 5.13

sarva-karmani manasa sannyasyaste sukham vashi nava-dvare pure dehi naiva kurvan na karayan

Translation :The self-controlled and detached reside happily in the city of nine gates, free from the thought that they are cause or doer of anything.





VERSE 5.14

na kartritvam na karmani lokasya srijati prabhuh na karma-phala-sanyogam svabhavas tu pravartate

Translation :Neither the sense of doer ship nor does the actions or results came from the god; All this is performed by the modes of the materialistic nature.





VERSE 5.15

nadatte kasyachit papam na chaiva sukritam vibhuh ajnanenavritam jnanam tena muhyanti jantavah

Translation :The supreme consciousness does not involve himself in the immoral or the moral deeds of anyone. The living beings are deluded because their knowledge is covered by ignorance.





VERSE 5.16

jnnena tu tad ajnanam yesham nashitam atmanah tesham aditya-vaj jnanam prakashayati tat param

Translation :But for those, ignorance of self is destroyed by the knowledge of self. That knowledge reveals the supreme entity like the rising sun illuminates everything in the daytime.





VERSE 5.17

tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas tan-nishthas tat-parayanah gachchhantyapunar-avrittim jnana-nirdhuta-kalmashah

Translation :Those persons whose intellect is absorbed in God, who have firm faith in God, such persons quickly reach a state from where there is no return; their sins will be washed away by the divine light of knowledge.





VERSE 5.18

vidya-vinaya-sampanne brahmane gavi hastini

shuni chaiva shva-pake cha panḍitah sama-darshinah

Translation :The one who has truly learned the ultimate truth sees everything as equal, a cow, a brahmin, an elephant, a dog, and a dog-eater as well.





VERSE 5.19

ihaiva tair jitah sargo yesham samye sthitam manah nirdosham hi samam brahma tasmad brahmani te sthitah

Translation :Those conquer the cycle of life and birth and death whose minds are fixed in meditating the absolute truth and equality of vision.





VERSE 5.20

na prahrishyet priyam prapya nodvijet prapya chapriyam sthira-buddhir asammuḍho brahma-vid brahmani sthitah

Translation :Being established in the absolute truth and not hampered by the deception, they neither grieve on obtaining something unpleasant or getting something pleasant.





VERSE 5.21

bahya-sparsheshvasaktatma vindatyatmani yat sukham sa brahma-yoga-yuktatma sukham akshayam ashnute

Translation :The one whose mind is detached from the external sense pleasures experiences divine pleasure in self. United with God through yoga , they experience never-ending happiness.





VERSE 5.22

ye hi sansparsha-ja bhoga duhkha-yonaya eva te adyantavantah kaunteya na teshu ramate budhah

Translation :All the pleasures that arise from these sense objects appear as enjoyable and pleasurable has a beginning and end to them. But a wise man never finds satisfaction in these sense objects of pleasures.





VERSE 5.23

shaknotihaiva yah soḍhum prak sharira-vimokshanat kama-krodhodbhavam vegam sa yuktah sa sukhi narah

Translation :Such a person is a true yogi who can control the senses and impulses of desire and anger; they are self-satisfied.





VERSE 5.24

yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas tathantar-jyotir eva yah

sa yogi brahma-nirvanam brahma-bhuto 'dhigachchhati

Translation :Those who are happy with who they are, who enjoy the presence of the divine god within, such persons are enlightened from within. Such yogis are united with the supreme and are liberated from this material world.





VERSE 5.25

labhante brahma-nirvanam rishayah kshina-kalmashah chhinna-dvaidha yatatmanah sarva-bhuta-hite ratah

Translation :Yogis whose sins have been removed, who are engaged in welfare of all living beings, attains god and liberation.





VERSE 5.26

kama-krodha-viyuktanam yatinam yata-chetasam abhito brahma-nirvanam vartate viditatmanam

Translation :Those sanyasis who have controlled their minds and are self-realized, free from desire and anger, soon achieve liberation from material existence.





VERSE 5.27 - 5.28

sparshan kritva bahir bahyansh chakshush chaivantare bhruvoh

pranapanau samau kritva nasabhyantara-charinau yatendriya-mano-buddhir munir moksha-parayanah vigatechchha-bhaya-krodho yah sada mukta eva sah

Translation :The yogi who shuts all the external pleasures and fixes his concentration on the space in between his eyebrows, stabilizing the inward and outward breath and thus controls his senses, mind, and intelligence, that sage becomes free from desires and fear and is certainly free.





VERSE 5.29

bhoktaram yajna-tapasam sarva-loka-maheshvaram suhridam sarva-bhutanam jnatva mam shantim richchhati

Translation :My devotee realizes that I am the one who enjoys the sacrifices and austerities; I am the supreme lord of this world and friend of all living beings.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 6

MEDITATION, SELF RESTRAINT & LIBERATION

(DHYANA YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna clears the doubts of Arjuna and explains the difference between Karma Yoga and Karma Sanyas . Lord Krishna reinforces the practicality of Karma Sanyas. He explains how Karma performed with devotion and faith in the mind purifies the person's mind.

Shri Krishna further explains about Yoga Sadhna . He tells how the person who does Yoga Sadhna needs to calm their mind and make it steady. He also describes how one person can control his/her mind in the chapter's verses.

Arjuna still seems to be doubts and confused, and with all the doubts, again asks a question.

He now asks a question for new spiritual aspirants who want to steady their minds but are never reach their goals because of unsteady minds.

Then Shri Krishna explains how spiritual aspirants can control their minds and reach a steady state of mind.





VERSE 6.1

shri bhagavan uvacha

anashritah karma-phalam karyam karma karoti yah sa sannyssi cha yogi cha na niragnir na chakriyah

Translation :The one who performs all his prescribed duties without having a desire for the results is an actual sanyasi and a yogi . One can’t become a sanyasi by not performing the sacrifice and not performing the activities.





VERSE 6.2

yam sannyasam iti prahur yogam tam viddhi panḍava na hyasannyasta-sankalpo yogi bhavati kashchana

Translation : Sanyas is not different from yoga ; one can only become a yogi without renouncing materialistic desires.





VERSE 6.3

shri bhagavan uvacha

anashritah karma-phalam karyam karma karoti yah sa sannyssi cha yogi cha na niragnir na chakriyah

Translation :The one who is a beginner and aspires to be on the divine path of yoga , work(Karma ) without attachments leads to a real pleasure.





VERSE 6.4

yada hi nendriyartheshu na karmasv-anushajjate sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi yogaruḍhas tadochyate

Translation :When one is not attached to material objects nor the actions that led to their enjoyments, at that time, one is said to have attained yoga .





VERSE 6.5

uddhared atmanatmanam natmanam avasadayet atmaiva hyatmano bandhur atmaiva ripur atmanah

Translation :Use the power of your mind to elevate yourself- and not degrade yourself, as the mind is your best friend and your worst enemy.


VERSE 6.6

bandhur atmatmanas tasya yenatmaivatmana jitah anatmanas tu shatrutve vartetatmaiva shatru-vat

Translation :Those who have conquered their mind, it’s their best friend, and those who are unable to control their mind become their greatest enemy.





VERSE 6.7

jitatmanah prashantasya paramatma samahitah shitoshna-sukha-duhkheshu tatha manapamanayoh

Translation :The one who has conquered his mind and has risen above the dualities of life, For such person heat, cold, happiness-distress, honor and dishonor all are same.





VERSE 6.8

jnana-vijnana-triptatma kuta-stho vijitendriyah yukta ityuchyate yogi sama-loshtashma-kanchanah

Translation :The yogi who is self-satisfied due to his knowledge and has conquered their senses, and is under control- such people see everything dirt, stones, and gold equally.





VERSE 6.9

suhrin-mitraryudasina-madhyastha-dveshya-bandhushu sadhushvapi cha papeshu sama-buddhir vishishyate

Translation :The yogi with impartial intelligence sees all with equal vision, be it an honest well-wisher, friend, foe, the pious, and the sinners with an impartial intelligence, considered to be honored among humans.





VERSE 6.10

yogi yunjita satatam atmanam rahasi sthitah ekaki yata-chittatma nirashir aparigrahah

Translation :A yogi must live in a solitary, constantly engage in meditation with a controlled mind and body, without any desires and possessions.





VERSE 6.11

shuchau deshe pratishthapya sthiram asanam atmanah natyuchchhritam nati-nicham chailajina-kushottaram

Translation :One should establish his Asana (seat) in a clean environment that is not too high, not too low, by placing kush grass, deerskin, and a cloth one above the other to practice yoga.





VERSE 6.12-6.13

tatraikagram manah kritva yata-chittendriya-kriyah upavishyasane yunjyad yogam atma-vishuddhaye samam kaya-shiro-grivam dharayann achalam sthirah samprekshya nasikagram svam dishash chanavalokayan

Translation :Seated firmly on his seat, the yogi must strive to purify his mind by focusing it on mediation with one-pointed focus, controlling all his thoughts and activities. He must hold his body, neck, and head straight while gazing at the tip of his nose without letting the eyes wander here and there.





VERSE 6.14

prashantatma vigata-bhir brahmachari-vrate sthitah manah sanyamya mach-chitto yukta asita mat-parah

Translation :Therefore, with an undisturbed and serene mind, and then the yogi should meditate on me, having me as his highest goal.





VERSE 6.15

yunjann evam sadatmanam yogi niyata-manasah shantim nirvana-paramam mat-sanstham adhigachchhati

Translation :By constantly keeping the mind absorbed in me, the yogi who has a controlled mind attains supreme peace and liberation and my abode.





VERSE 6.16

natyashnatastu yogo ’sti na chaikantam anashnatah na chati-svapna-shilasya jagrato naiva charjuna

Translation :O Arjuna , the persons who eats too much or too little, a person who sleeps too much or too little never attains success.

VERSE 6.17

yuktahara-viharasya yukta-cheshtasya karmasu yukta-svapnavabodhasya yogo bhavati duhkha-ha

Translation :All sorrows end for a person who practices yoga and is temperate in eating and recreation, balanced in work and sleep.





VERSE 6.18

yada viniyatam chittam atmanyevavatishthate nihsprihah sarva-kamebhyo yukta ityuchyate tada

Translation :With a steady mind and through discipline, they learn to withdraw the mind from the selfish desires and cravings. Such a person is considered to be in yoga .





VERSE 6.19

yatha dipo nivata-stho nengate sopama smrita yogino yata-chittasya yunjato yogam atmanah

Translation :Just as the flame of a lamp kept in a windless place doesn’t flicker. Similarly, the mind of a yogi remains steady in meditation.





VERSE 6.20- 6.21 AND 6.22

yatroparamate chittam niruddham yoga-sevaya

yatra chaivatmanatmanam pashyann atmani tushyati sukham atyantikam yat tad buddhi-grahyam atindriyam vetti yatra na chaivayam sthitash chalati tattvatah

Translation :When the mind is directed away from material activities, it becomes peaceful by the practice of yoga , and it becomes detached from material desires. Then only one can actually rejoice in the inner bliss.



VERSE 6.23

tam vidyad duhkha-sanyoga-viyogam yogasanjnitam sa nishchayena yoktavyo yogo ’nirvinna-chetasa

Translation :That state of mind where the connection from the misery is destroyed is called yoga . This yoga has to be performed with diligence, free from pessimism.



VERSE 6.24-6.25

sankalpa-prabhavan kamans tyaktva sarvan asheshatah manasaivendriya-gramam viniyamya samantatah shanaih shanair uparamed buddhya dhriti-grihitaya atma-sanstham manah kritva na kinchid api chintayet

Translation :One should practice yoga with utmost determination and an unwavering mind, reject entirely all the materialistic desires. Slowly and steadily, with conviction and means of intelligence, you will fix the mind on the god alone and nothing else.





VERSE 6.26

yato yato nishcharati manash chanchalam asthiram tatas tato niyamyaitad atmanyeva vasham nayet

Translation :The mind is always wavering and restless, and whenever and wherever the mind seems to wander, one should bring it back under control and focus on the god.





VERSE 6.27

prashanta-manasam hyenam yoginam sukham uttamam upaiti shanta-rajasam brahma-bhutam akalmasham

Translation :The ultimate bliss is attained by the whose mind is calm, who has subdued his passions, who is free from sins, and who sees everything in connection with god.





VERSE 6.28

yunjann evam sadatmanam yogi vigata-kalmashah sukhena brahma-sansparsham atyantam sukham ashnute

Translation :In this way, a yogi who has united himself with god becomes free from material contamination can attain the ultimate bliss.





VERSE 6.29

sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam sarva-bhutani chatmani ikshate yoga-yuktatma sarvatra sama-darshanah

Translation :The one who is connected with God sees everything equally and perceives the supreme in all living beings.

VERSE 6.30

yo mam pashyati sarvatra sarvam cha mayi pashyati tasyaham na pranashyami sa cha me na pranashyati

Translation :Those who see me everywhere and sees everything in me, I am never lost, and they are never lost to me.





VERSE 6.31

sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam bhajatyekatvam asthitah sarvatha vartamano ’pi sa yogi mayi vartate

Translation :The yogi who is absorbed in me, with the knowledge that I am situated in all the living beings as the supreme consciousness, dwell only in me, although engaged in all kinds of actions.



VERSE 6.32

atmaupamyena sarvatra samam pashyati yo ’rjuna sukham va yadi va duhkham sa yogi paramo matah

Translation :I consider them a true yogi who sees every living being equally and responds to others' happiness and sadness as if they are their own.





VERSE 6.33

arjuna uvacha

yo ’yam yogas tvaya proktah samyena madhusudana etasyaham na pashyami chanchalatvat sthitim sthiram

Translation :O Krishna , The system of yoga that you have described seems impractical and unattainable to me because of the restless nature of the mind.





VERSE 6.34

chanchalam hi manah krishna pramathi balavad driḍham tasyaham nigraham manye vayor iva su-dushkaram

Translation :The mind very unstable, restless, powerful, and stubborn. O Krishna , it seems to me that it is as difficult to control the mind as to control the wind.





VERSE 6.35

shri bhagavan uvacha

asanshayam maha-baho mano durnigraham chalam abhyaena tu kaunteya vairagyena cha grihyate

Translation :Bhagawan Shri Krishna replied: O mighty-armed son of Kunti , indeed the mind is challenging to control, but with practice and detachment, it can be controlled.





VERSE 6.36

asanyatatmana yogo dushprapa iti me matih vashyatmana tu yatata shakyo ’vaptum upayatah

Translation :In my opinion, yoga is challenging to attain for those whose mind is uncontrolled. But those who strive to control his mind can achieve yoga .

VERSE 6.37

arjuna uvacha

ayatih shraddhayopeto yogach chalita-manasah aprapya yoga-sansiddhim kan gatim krishna gachchhati

Translation :Arjuna asked: What is the final destination of the yogi who has faith but can’t control his mind and cannot reach the goal of yoga??



VERSE 6.38

kachchin nobhaya-vibhrashtash chhinnabhram iva nashyati apratishtho maha-baho vimuḍho brahmanah pathi

Translation :Does a person who is deviated from this path of yoga , gets deprived in both material and spiritual success, and become like a lost, broken cloud with no position in either of the sphere?





VERSE 6.39

etan me sanshayam krishna chhettum arhasyasheshatah tvad-anyah sanshayasyasya chhetta na hyupapadyate

Translation :O Krishna , only you can remove this doubt of mine entirely, and no one else can.





VERSE 6.40

Shri bhagavan uvacha

partha naiveha namutra vinashas tasya vidyate

na hi kalyana-krit kashchid durgatim tata gachchhati

Translation :Shri Bhagawan replied: O Partha , the one who has engaged himself in the spiritual journey, can never meet with destruction in this world or the next one. A person who strives for the realization of god never suffers misfortune.





VERSE 6.41-6.42

prapya punya-kritam lokan ushitva shashvatih samah shuchinam shrimatam gehe yoga-bhrashto ’bhijayate atha va yoginam eva kule bhavati dhimatam

etad dhi durlabhataram loke janma yad idrisham

Translation :The unsuccessful yogis who fall from the practice of yoga go to the abode of the pious and dwell there for many years. They are then reborn into a family of noble and prosperous people who have divine wisdom. Such a birth is rarely attained in this world.





VERSE 6.43

tatra tam buddhi-sanyogam labhate paurva-dehikam yatate cha tato bhuyah sansiddhau kuru-nandana

Translation :O descendant of kurus , after taking such a birth on this planet, they regain and reawaken their wisdom from their previous births and strive even harder to attain perfection in yoga .





VERSE 6.44

purvabhyasena tenaiva hriyate hyavasho ’pi sah jijnasur api yogasya shabda-brahmativartate

Translation :Because of the practice from their previous births, they are automatically drawn towards god and the yoga process. Such seekers are naturally transcended above rituals and the principle of Vedas .





VERSE 6.45

prayatnad yatamanas tu yogi sanshuddha-kilbishah aneka-janma-sansiddhas tato yati param gatim

Translation :By the accumulated knowledge and wisdom from previous lives, these yogis , by sincere endeavors, achieve perfection after many lifetimes in this life itself.





VERSE 6.46

tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogi jnanibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikah karmibhyash chadhiko yogi tasmad yogi bhavarjuna

Translation :A yogi is superior to tapasvi ( the one who performs severe self-discipline), superior to jnani ( the one who tries to achieve the god with intellectual pursuits), even superior to the karmi ( the one who tries to attain liberation by performing Vedic rituals). That's why O Arjuna become a yogi .





VERSE 6.47

yoginam api sarvesham mad-gatenantar-atmana shraddhavan bhajate yo mam sa me yuktatamo matah

Translation :After getting satisfied with your sacrifice, celestial gods or the demigods will bestow upon you all the necessities of life. But the one who enjoys these things without offering them in return is a thief.





✽✽✽





PART II





CHAPTER 7

WISDOM FROM THE ABSOLUTE TRUTH

(JNANA VIJANANA YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna explains more on the material and spiritual dimensions; He explains how all these energies and dimensions are originated from him and rest in him. He tells that about the nature of material energy and how it is difficult to overcome his material energy.

He also explains how a person who surrenders to him can cross the material energy and attain liberation. He explains how people under the influence of material desires always surrender and pray to celestial gods. However, the heavenly gods also drive their power and energies from the Supreme lord only.





VERSE 7.1

shri bhagavan uvacha

mayyasakta-manah partha yogam yunjan mad-ashrayah asanshayam samagram mam yatha jnasyasi tach chhrinu

Translation :Bhagawan Shri Krishna said: O Arjuna , with the mind attached to me and the one who practices yoga surrendering to me, only then can you completely know me without any doubts.





VERSE 7.2

jnanam te ’ham sa-vijnanam idam vakshyamyasheshatah yaj jnatva neha bhuyo ’nyaj jnatavyam-avashishyate

Translation :Now I will reveal this knowledge and wisdom. Once you understand this, nothing will remain to be known in this world.





VERSE 7.3

manushyanam sahasreshu kashchid yatati siddhaye yatatam api siddhanam kashchin mam vetti tattvatah

Translation :Among the thousands of men, only one endeavor for perfection. And among those who have achieved perfection, only one knows me in truth.





VERSE 7.4

bhumir-apo ’nalo vayuh kham mano buddhir eva cha ahankara itiyam me bhinna prakritir ashtadha

Translation :Earth, Fire, Water, Air, Space, mind, intellect, and ego-These are eight different components that constitute my material nature.





VERSE 7.5

apareyam itas tvanyam prakritim viddhi me param jiva-bhutam maha-baho yayedam dharyate jagat

Translation :This is my inferior energy. But beyond it, O mighty-armed Arjuna , there is another nature, superior to this nature. That is the jiva shakti or ‘the soul energy’ or the conscious potency that consists of embodied souls that balances and maintains this universe.





VERSE 7.6

etad-yonini bhutani sarvanityupadharaya

aham kritsnasya jagatah prabhavah pralayas tatha

Translation :Understand that these two energies of mine manifest all beings. I am the source of all this creation, and into me, it again dissolves.

VERSE 7.7

mattah parataram nanyat kinchid asti dhananjaya mayi sarvam idam protam sutre mani-gana iva

Translation :There’s nothing superior to me, O Dhananjay . Everything rests upon Me, Just like jewels rest upon a thread.





VERSE 7.8

raso ’ham apsu kaunteya prabhasmi shashi-suryayoh pranavah sarva-vedeshu shabdah khe paurusham nrsishu

Translation : I am the taste in water and the sun's radiance and the moon, O son of Kunti . I am the syllable om in the sacred Vedic mantras ; I am the sound in the space and human beings' ability.





VERSE 7.9

punyo gandhah prithivyam cha tejash chasmi vibhavasau jivanam sarva-bhuteshu tapash chasmi tapasvishu

Translation :I am the original aroma of the earth, the luster of the fire. I am the life of all the creatures and the penances of all the yogis .





VERSE 7.10

bijam mam sarva-bhutanam viddhi partha sanatanam buddhir buddhimatam asmi tejas tejasvinam aham

Translation :O Arjuna , understand that I am the cause of all the living beings; I am the intellect of the intelligent and the power of the powerful.





VERSE 7.11

balam balavatam chaham kama-raga-vivarjitam dharmaviruddho bhuteshu kamo ’smi bharatarshabha

Translation :I am the might of the mighty, which is devoid of desire and passion. I am the sexual activity that does not violate the principles of dharma .





VERSE 7.12

ye chaiva sattvika bhava rajasas tamasash cha ye matta eveti tan viddhi na tvaham teshu te mayi

Translation :Also, Understand that all the three states of material existence- goodness, passion, and ignorance originated from my energy. They are in me. However, I am beyond them.





VERSE 7.13

tribhir guna-mayair bhavair ebhih sarvam idam jagat mohitam nabhijanati mamebhyah param avyayam

Translation :The whole world is deluded in these three modes of Maya . Therefore no one can understand me as I am superior to these modes of Maya .





VERSE 7.14

daivi hyesha guna-mayi mama maya duratyaya mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te

Translation :My divine energy consists of three modes of material nature and is challenging to overcome. But the one who surrenders to me can easily defeat them.





VERSE 7.15

na mam dushkritino mudhah prapadyante naradhamah mayayapahrita-jnana asuram bhavam ashritah

Translation :There are four kinds of people who never surrender to me- The foolish, the lowest of men who lazily follow their lower nature, those whose knowledge is covered with illusion, and then those who have a demonic nature.





VERSE 7.16

chatur-vidha bhajante mam janah sukritino ’rjuna arto jijnasur artharthi jnani cha bharatarshabha

Translation :O descendant of Bharata , There are four kinds of people who engage in my worship: those in distress, the seekers of wealth, and those who desire self-realization.

VERSE 7.17

tesham jnani nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir vishishyatee priyo hi jnanino tyartham aham sa cha mama priyah

Translation : Of all of them, the one who desires self- realization, I consider them to be the highest—the one who is constantly meditating in thoughts of me and devoted to me. I am dear to them, and they are dear to me.





VERSE 7.18

udarah sarva evaite jnani tvatmaiva me matam asthitah sa hi yuktatma mam evanuttamam gatim

Translation :All those people who are devoted to me are virtuous. But those self-realized, whose mind is fixed upon me, I consider them as my own self.





VERSE 7.19

bahunam janmanam ante jnanavan mam prapadyate vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah

Translation : After many births, the one who possesses the knowledge and surrenders to me realizes that I am the source of everything. Such a great personality is very rare.





VERSE 7.20

kamais tais tair hrita-jnanah prapadyante ’nya-devatah tam tam niyamam asthaya prakritya niyatah svaya

Translation :Those whose knowledge is deluded in material desires surrender to other gods. Following their own nature, they worship the gods, performing the rituals meant to satisfy those gods.


VERSE 7.21

yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah shraddhayarchitum ichchhati tasya tasyachalam shraddham tam eva vidadhamyaham

Translation :Whatever celestial demigods man desires to worship with faith. I strengthen the faith of devotees in that demigod.





VERSE 7.22

sa taya shraddhaya yuktas tasyaradhanam ihate labhate cha tatah kaman mayaiva vihitan hi tan

Translation :The devotee who worships a celestial demigod and attains his desires' fulfillment is because of my sanctions only.





VERSE 7.23

antavat tu phalam tesham tad bhavatyalpa-medhasam devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api

Translation :The results attained by such people with little intelligence are temporary. Those who worship these celestial demigods reach the heavenly abodes while my devotees attain me.


VERSE 7.24

avyaktam vyaktim apannam manyante mam abuddhayah param bhavam ajananto mamavyayam anuttamam

Translation :The less intelligent people think and consider that I was formless earlies, and now I have accepted this material form and personality. They do not understand the imperishable nature of my form.



VERSE 7.25

naham prakashah sarvasya yoga-maya-samavritah muḍho ’yam nabhijanati loko mam ajam avyayam

Translation :I do not manifest myself to everyone, I am hidden in my divine yogamaya potency, and thus the person without knowledge can’t recognize me as unborn and changeless.





VERSE 7.26

vedaham samatitani vartamanani charjuna bhavishyani cha bhootani mam tu veda na kashchana

Translation :O Arjuna , I know about the past, present, and future, and I know all the living beings, but they don’t know me.





VERSE 7.27

ichchha-dvesha-samutthena dvandva-mohena bharata sarva-bhutani sammoham sarge yanti parantapa

Translation :O conqueror of enemies, at the beginning of creation, all the living beings in the material realm are deluded by the dualities of desire and aversion.



VERSE 7.28

yesham tvanta-gatam papam jananam punya-karmanam te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mam driḍha-vratah

Translation :But the persons, who are purified by engaging in pious activities, become free from the illusion of dualities, and such a person worships me with dedication.





VERSE 7.29

jara-marana-mokshaya mam ashritya yatanti ye

te brahma tadviduh kritsnam adhyatmam karma chakhilam

Translation :Those who strive to free me from old age and death by taking shelter in me come to know the absolute truth and the laws of karmic actions.





VERSE 7.30

sadhibhutadhidaivam mam sadhiyajnam cha ye viduh prayana-kale ’pi cha mam te vidur yukta-chetasah

Translation :Those who know me as controller of the matter, controller of demigods, and the recipients of all the sacrifices. Such souls are in the consciousness of me even at the time of death.


✽✽✽





CHAPTER 8

LIBERATION BY SERVING THE SUPEREME

(AKSHAR BRAHMA YOGA)





S hri Krishna explains the concepts and terms from the Upanishads . He further explains what happens with the soul after an individual's death. Lord Krishna also explains to Arjuna how being absorbed in the supreme lord can take an individual from the material realms and dimensions to the spiritual realms.

He further explains the cycle of life and creations, how everything is originated from him, and how they eventually are absorbed back into him. Although the abode of the divine is untouched by the cycle of creation and destruction, those who attain this divine abode are liberated from the cycle of birth and death and never take birth again in this material world.


VERSE 8.1-2

arjuna uvacha

kim tad brahma kim adhyatmam kim karma purushottama adhibhutam cha kim proktam adhidaivam kim uchyate adhiyajnah katham ko ’tra dehe ’smin madhusudana prayana-kale cha katham jneyo ’si niyatatmabhih

Translation :Arjuna replied: O Supreme Lord, What is brahman ? What is adhyatma (self)? What is karma (action)? What is adhibhuta? Who are demigods? What is the object of sacrifice and what is adhiyajna , and how is he dwell in the body?

O Krishna , how can one who is self-controlled attain you at the time of death?





VERSE 8.3

shri bhagavan uvacha

aksharam brahma paramam svabhavo ’dhyatmam uchyate bhuta-bhavodbhava-karo visargah karma-sanjnitah

Translation :Bhagavan Shri Krishna replied: Brahman is the supreme imperishable and indestructible entity, one's self, the original spiritual nature is called Atma or Adhyatma . Actions(Karma ) are related to living beings' material personality and their development.





VERSE 8.4

adhibhutam ksharo bhavah purushash chadhidaivatam adhiyajno ’ham evatra dehe deha-bhritam vara

Translation :The material manifestation is constantly changing. And this whole material universe is the cosmic form of the supreme soul. I, who resides in all the living beings' heart, is the lord of all the sacrifices.





VERSE 8.5

anta-kale cha mam eva smaran muktva kalevaram yah prayati sa mad-bhavam yati nastyatra sanshayah

Translation :At the time of death, those who remember me; attain me! There is no doubt about that.





VERSE 8.6

yam yam vapi smaran bhavam tyajatyante kalevaram tam tam evaiti kaunteya sada tad-bhava-bhavitah

Translation :O son of Kunti , whatever a person remembers at the time of death attains that state.

VERSE 8.7

tasmat sarveshu kaleshu mam anusmara yudhya cha mayyarpita-mano-buddhir mam evaishyasyasanshayam

Translation : Therefore, always remember me and do your duty of fighting this battle. With mind and intelligence surrendered to me. You’ll undoubtedly attain me, and there’s no doubt about that.





VERSE 8.8

abhyasa-yoga-yuktena chetasa nanya-gamina paramam purusham divyam yati parthanuchintayan

Translation :O Partha , the one who practices yoga and focuses and engages the mind on remembering me, the divine supreme, will undoubtedly attain me.





VERSE 8.9-8.10

kavim puranam anushasitaram anor aniyansam anusmared yah

sarvasya dhataram achintya-rupam aditya-varnam tamasah parastat prayana-kale manasachalena bhaktya yukto yoga-balena chaiva

bhruvor madhye pranam aveshya samyak sa tam param purusham upaiti divyam

Translation :One should meditate upon the supreme person, who is omniscient, the controller, who is smaller than the atomic particles, yet who supports all the things in this universe. Whose has inconceivable form, which is brighter than the sun and beyond darkness and the material nature. At the time of death, the one who fixes his mind without any distraction sets the prana or life energy between the eyebrows and remembers the divine with a steady mind will surely attain him.

VERSE 8.11

yad aksharam veda-vido vadanti vishanti yad yatayo vita-ragah

yad ichchhanto brahmacharyam charanti tat te padam sangrahena pravakshye

Translation :Great sages describe him as timeless and imperishable. These sages practice the vow of celibacy and utter om. I shall now explain this process.





VERSE 8.12

sarva-dvarani sanyamya mano hridi nirudhya cha murdhnyadhayatmanah pranam asthito yoga-dharanam

Translation :Restrict all the gates of body, fix your mind in the heart region, draw your life-breath to the head area. One must learn to establish yogic concentration.


VERSE 8.13

om ityekaksharam brahma vyaharan mam anusmaran yah prayati tyajan deham sa yati paramam gatim

Translation :By restraining all the gates of the body, controlling all the senses, and fixing the mind within the heart. And the drawing the life-airs to the head between the eyebrows. One must absorb in yogic concentration.





VERSE 8.14

ananya-chetsh satatam yo mam smarati nityashah tasyaham sulabhah partha nitya-yuktasya yoginah

Translation :By chanting the syllable om while remembering me at the time of leaving this material body, one will attain the supreme goal.


VERSE 8.15

mam upetya punar janma duhkhalayam ashashvatam napnuvanti mahatmanah sansiddhim paramam gatah

Translation :O Partha , the yogi who remembers me and me only with all his devotion, without any distraction. Can easily attain me and will always be connected to me.


VERSE 8.16

a-brahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino Arjuna mam upetyaa tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate

Translation :O Arjuna , In all these worlds and planets of material creation, up to the highest abodes, all are the places of birth and rebirth. But those who attain me and my abode, there is no further abode.



VERSE 8.17

sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano viduh ratrim yuga-sahasrantam te ’ho-ratra-vido janah

Translation :One day of Brahma consists of one thousand cycles of four ages, and his night also lasts for the same.


VERSE 8.18

avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah prabhavantyahar-agame ratryagame praliyante tatraivavyakta-sanjnake

Translation : At the beginning of Brahma 's day, all the living beings are manifested from the unmanifested state. When the Brahma's nights begin, all the manifested bodies are again merged in the unmanifested state.





VERSE 8.19

bhuta-gramah sa evayam bhutva bhutva praliyate ratryagame ’vashah partha prabhavatyahar-agame

Translation :Partha, All living beings take birth again and again with the rise of Brahma day, and once the day ends and the cosmic night begins, all that is manifested is absorbed in me, and at then they are reborn again on the next rise of Brahma day.





VERSE 8.20

paras tasmat tu bhavo ’nyo ’vyakto ’vyaktat sanatanah yah sa sarveshu bhuteshu nashyatsu na vinashyati

Translation :However, transcendental to this eternal manifest and unmanifest loop, there is a dimension, my supreme abode. After attaining this destination, no one ever returns and is absorbed there forever.





VERSE 8.21

avyakto ’kshara ityuktas tam ahuh paramm gatim

yam prapya na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama

Translation :That unmanifest and eternal dimension is the ultimate goal; after reaching there, no one ever has returned. That’s my supreme abode.





VERSE 8.22

purushah sa parah partha bhaktya labhyas tvananyaya yasyantah-sthani bhutani yena sarvam idam tatam

Translation :O Partha , that supreme personality is the greatest. Although he resides in all living beings and all living beings reside in him. Yet, he can only be attained by devotion.





VERSE 8.23,8.24,8.25,8.26

yatra kale tvanavrittim avrittim chaiva yoginah prayata yanti tam kalam vakshyami bharatarshabha agnir jyotir ahah shuklah shan-masa uttarayanam tatra prayata gachchhanti brahma brahma-vido janah dhumo ratris tatha krishnah shan-masa dakshinayanam tatra chandramasam jyotir yogi prapya nivartate shukla-krihne gati hyete jagatah shashvate mate

ekaya yatyanavrittim anyayavartate punah

Translation :O descendants of Bharata , I shall now explain to you the two paths of passing away from this mortal world. The one who is aware of the supreme Brahman when departing from this world. During the six months when the sun’s northern course is done, after the bright part of the day, the bright fortnight of the moon attains the ultimate divine destination.

However, the yogi who practices Vedic rituals passes during the time during the sun’s southern course, in the dark fortnight moon, at the time of night and smoke, after reaching the celestial abodes and after enjoying there for a while, they are again sent back to this mortal world.

These are the two paths, bright and dark, that will always exist in this world. The bright path leads to Enlightenment and liberation forever. However, the dark one will lead to rebirth on this mortal planet again.





VERSE 8.27

naite sriti partha janan yogi muhyati kashchana tasmat sarveshu kaleshu yoga-yukto bhavarjuna

Translation :The yogi who understands the secret of these two paths will never get distracted and will always be absorbed in the yoga .





VERSE 8.28

vedeshu yajneshu tapahsu chaiva daneshu yat punya-phalam pradishtam atyeti tat sarvam idam viditva

yogi param sthanam upaiti chadyam

Translation :After being aware of these two paths, yogi surpasses all kinds of fruits gained from s rituals, reading Vedas , performing sacrifices, penances and charities. That yogi reaches the supreme abode.





✽✽✽





Chapter 9





ROYAL PATH, ROYAL WISDOM & ROYAL MYSTERY

(Raja Vidya Yoga)





I n this chapter, Lord Krishna explains to Arjuna his countless material forms that were created from the beginning of time, how everything comes into the creation and eventually goes back into him. He explains further to Arjuna that Lord Krishna is the only refuge and final goal of all the souls.

Lord Krishna then explains about Pure Bhakti and its superiority.

How the people who are exclusively devoted to him reach the divine abode and are dear to Lord Krishna .





VERSE 9.1

shri bhagavan uvacha

idam tu te guhyatamam pravakshyamyanasuyave jnanam vijnana-sahitam yaj jnatva mokshyase ’shubhat

Translation :O Arjuna , Because you are not envious of me, I shall now reveal the greatest secret of knowledge and wisdom. After knowing this, you’ll be free from all the miseries and inauspiciousness.





VERSE 9.2

raja-vidya raja-guhyam pavitram idam uttamam pratyakshavagamam dharmyam su-sukham kartum avyayam

Translation :Knowledge is the greatest of all the sciences and the king of all secrets. This is the most purifying and is in the path of dharma . It is easy to practice and is imperishable.





VERSE 9.3

ashraddadhanah purusha dharmasyasya parantapa aprapya mam nivartante mrityu-samsara-vartmani

Translation :People who have no faith in dharma can never attain me and are reborn again and again on this mortal planet.





VERSE 9.4

maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina

mat-sthani sarva-bhutani na chaham teshvavasthitah

Translation :All this cosmic manifestation permeates me in My unmanifested form, all the living beings are always supported by me, but I am not supported by them.





VERSE 9.5

na cha mat-sthani bhutani pashya me yogam aishwaram bhuta-bhrin na cha bhuta-stho mamatma bhuta-bhavanah

Translation :And yet, all the living beings don’t rest in me. Behold the mystery of my divine power. Although I am the creator and the origin of all the living beings, I am not influenced by them nor by any material nature.





VERSE 9.6

yathakasha-sthito nityam vayuh sarvatra-go mahan tatha sarvani bhutani mat-sthanityupadharaya

Translation :And yet, all the living beings don’t rest in me. Behold the mystery of my divine power. Although I am the creator and the origin of all the living beings, I am not influenced by them nor by any material nature.


VERSE 9.7-9.8

sarva-bhutani kaunteya prakritim yanti mamikam kalpa-kshaye punas tani kalpadau visrijamyaham prakritim svam avashtabhya visrijami punah punah

bhuta-gramam imam kritsnam avasham prakriter vashat

Translation :O son of Kunti , at the end of kalp, All living beings merge into me. I manifest them again at the beginning of the new kalp . I continuously manifest all living beings again and again that are helplessly manipulated by their natures.





VERSE 9.9

na cha mam tani karmani nibadhnanti dhananjaya udasina-vad asinam asaktam teshu karmasu

Translation :O Dhananjaya , None of these actions can bind me. I am ever detached from these actions.





VERSE 9.10

mayadhyakshena prakritih suyate sa-characharam hetunanena kaunteya jagad viparivartate

Translation :With my command, this material energy creates this universe, with all its moving and non- moving beings. O son of Kunti , That’s why this material universe is always manifesting, maintaining, and unmanifested.





VERSE 9.11

avajananti mam muḍha manushim tanum ashritam param bhavam ajananto mama bhuta-maheshvaram

Translation :Those who are not aware of my divine nature and personality are ignorant and mock me, and are unable to recognize me.





VERSE 9.12

moghsha mogha-karmano mogha-jnana vichetasah rakshasmm asurim chaiva prakritim mohinim shritah

Translation :Such people are bewildered by the material energy. In this deluded and senseless state, they adopt demonic and atheistic views, and all their aspirations, actions, and knowledge are wasted.


VERSE 9.13

mahatmanas tu mam partha daivim prakritim ashritah bhajantyananya-manaso jnatva bhutadim avyayam

Translation :However, those who have great souls take shelter of my divine nature, worship me with a steady mind, fixed exclusively on me.


VERSE 9.14

satatam kirtayanto mam yatantash cha driḍha-vratah namasyantash cha mam bhaktya nitya-yukta upasate

Translation :They always sing my divine glories me. They are endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before me with devotion. Such enlightened souls worship me with their loving devotion.





VERSE 9.15

jnana-yajnena chapyanye yajanto mam upasate ekatvena prithaktvena bahudha vishvato-mukham

Translation :Others worship me by sacrificing the knowledge; some see me as not different from them. At the same time, some worship me in many different forms. Still, others worship me as my universal cosmic form.





VERSE 9.16-9.17

aham kratur aham yajnah svadhaham aham aushadham mantro ’ham aham evajyam aham agnir aham hutam pitaham asya jagato mata dhata pitamahah

vedyam pavitram omkara rik sama yajur eva cha

Translation :It is me who the Vedic ritual, I am the sacrifice, and I am the offering to the ancestors, I am the sacred medicinal herb, I am the mantra, and I am the clarified butter, I am the sacred fire and the act of offering. I am the father and mother both of this universe, the goal of knowledge, the purifier, the syllable om. I am the rig veda , sama veda and the yajur veda .





VERSE 9.18

gatir bharta prabhuh sakshi nivasah sharanam suhrit prabhavah pralayah sthanam nidhanam bijam avyayam

Translation :I am the supreme goal and objective of all living beings. I am the supreme master, the sustainer, witness, abode, the shelter, and the dearest friend. I am the origin, the end, destruction, and the final resting place of all the creations. I am the wealth, the storehouse, and the indestructible, eternal seed.





VERSE 9.19

tapamyaham aham varsham nigrihnamyutsrijami cha amritam chaiva mrityush cha sad asach chaham arjuna

Translation :I create heat and send forth the rain. I am eternality, and I am the death. I am the reality, and I am the illusion. I am the spirit as well as the matter.





VERSE 9.20

trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa yajnair ishtva svar-gatim prarthayante te punyam asadya surendra-lokam ashnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan

Translation :Those who desire to attain fruition results worship me as described in the Vedas through ritualistic practices. By drinking soma juice, they get purified and attain higher abodes. Because of their pious activities, they reach the abode of Indra , Who is the king of heaven, and enjoy the pleasures of the demigods.





VERSE 9.21

te tam bhuktva swarga-lokam vishalam kshine punye martya-lokam vishanti evam trayi-dharmam anuprapanna gatagatam kama-kama labhante

Translation : When they have enjoyed enough pleasures in heaven and have exhausted their earned credits doing pious activities, they come back to this mortal planet. Therefore who follow the Vedic rituals based on the desires of all these pleasures often come back and repeatedly go from this mortal planet.





VERSE 9.22

ananyash chintayanto mam ye janah paryupasate tesham nityabhiyuktanam yoga-kshemam vahamyaham

Translation :But those who are always absorbed in me and my thoughts, who worship me with full devotion, I provide them what they don’t have and preserve what they already have.





VERSE 9.23

ye ’pyanya-devata-bhakta yajante shraddhayanvitah te ’pi mam eva kaunteya yajantyavidhi-purvakam

Translation :O son of Kunti , those who worship other gods and also worship me, but they do it so improperly.


VERSE 9.24

aham hi sarva-yajnanam bhokta cha prabhureva cha na tu mam abhijananti tattvenatash chyavanti te

Translation :I am the enjoyer of all objects of sacrifices, but those who fail to understand this and my divine nature, fall back down and must take rebirth.





VERSE 9.25

yanti deva-vrata devan pitrin yanti pitri-vratah bhutani yanti bhutejya yanti mad-yajino ’pi mam

Translation :Those who worship the demigods will attain the demigods; those who worship their ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who worship ghosts and spirits take birth in the world of ghosts and spirits. But those who worship me come to my abode.





VERSE 9.26

patram pushpam phalam toyam yo me bhaktya prayachchhati tadaham bhaktyupahritam ashnami prayatatmanah

Translation :Suppose one offers to me a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or even some water with all his devotion. I will accept that offering delightfully from my pure-hearted devotee.





VERSE 9.27

yat karoshi yad ashnasi yaj juhoshi dadasi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kurushva mad-arpanam

Translation :O son of kunti, Whatever you do, whatever you eat and whatever you offer in sacrifice, whatever you offer in charity. You do that as an offering to me.

VERSE 9.28

shubhashubha-phalair evam mokshyase karma-bandhanaih sannyasa-yoga-yuktatma vimukto mam upaishyas i

Translation :Dedicate all your work to me, and you’ll be free from the bondage of karma ; you’ll be free from the good and the bad results. With your mind attached to me, you’ll be liberated and will attain me.





VERSE 9.29

samo ’ham sarva-bhuteshu na me dveshyo ’sti na priyah ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya mayi te teshu chapyaham

Translation :I am equal to all living beings and not partial to anyone. But the devotees who worship me with all the love reside in me, and I reside in them.





VERSE 9.30

api chet su-duracharo bhajate mam ananya-bhak sadhur eva sa mantavyah samyag vyavasito hi sah

Translation :Even if one is a sinner and has committed sins and pious activities, if that person worships me with all his devotion, that person should be considered righteous because of his perfect determination.





VERSE 9.31

kshipram bhavati dharmatma shashvach-chhantim nigachchhati

kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranashyati

Translation :And then quickly, that person will become virtuous and attains everlasting peace. O son of Kunti , declare this boldly that no devotee of mine is ever lost.





VERSE 9.32

mam hi partha vyapashritya ye ’pi syuh papa-yonayah striyo vaishyas tatha shudras te ’pi yanti param gatim

Translation :All those who take refuge in me, irrespective of their birth, race, caste, and sex. Even though society scorns them, I will attain my highest destination.





VERSE 9.33

kim punar brahmanah punya bhakta rajarshayas tatha anityam asukham lokam imam prapya bhajasva mam

Translation :What to say about kings and the pure sages? Therefore, having come to this temporary world of misery, engage in my devotion.





VERSE 9.34

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru mam evaishyasi yuktvaivam atmanam mat-parayanah

Translation :Always be absorbed in my thought, be My devotee, worship me, offer your respects to me. Dedicate your mind and body unto me, and you’ll certainly come to me.


✽✽✽





CHAPTER 10

THE GREATNESS OF THE DIVINE

(VIBHUTI YOGA)




I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna explains to Arjuna that everything in this entire universe has taken birth from Lord Shri Krishna 's mind. Even the qualities that all creatures possess have originated from Lord Krishna's mind only.

After listening to Lord Shri Krishna's glories, Arjuna gets fully convinced that Lord Shri Krishna is the supreme personality. Shri Krishna reveals that everything in this entire universe has manifested only from him.


VERSE 10.1

shri bhagavan uvacha

bhuya eva maha-baho shrinu me paramam vachah yatte ’ham priyamanaya vakshyami hita-kamyaya

Translation :Shri Krishna then said to Arjuna: Listen to these divine teachings O mighty Arjuna. I shall speak this to you because I desire your welfare because you’re my dear friend.





VERSE 10.2

na me viduh sura-ganah prabhavam na maharshayah aham adir hi devanam maharshinam cha sarvashah

Translation :Neither the demigods nor the sages are aware of my origin. Indeed, I am the source from those demigods and sages originated.





VERSE 10.3

yo mamajam anadim cha vetti loka-maheshvaram asammuḍhah sa martyeshu sarva-papaih pramuchyate

Translation :The one who knows me as birthless, beginningless, and the Supreme Lord of the universe, That person is free from illusion and is free from Karma and all evils.





VERSE 10.4-10.5

buddhir jnanam asammohah kshama satyam damah shamah sukham duhkham bhavo ’bhavo bhayam chabhayameva cha ahinsa samata tushtis tapo danam yasho ’yashah

bhavanti bhava bhutanam matta eva prithag-vidhah

Translation : From me and me only, all the qualities of humans arise such as intelligence, knowledge, clarity of thought, freedom from delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control over senses, happiness and sadness, fear and fearlessness, birth and death, non-violence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame and even infamy.





VERSE 10.6

maharshayah sapta purve chatvaro manavas tatha mad-bhava manasa jata yesham loka imah prajah

Translation : The seven great sages, the four Kumaras , and the Manus , from whom all the people of this world have descended, are a manifestation of my mind.





VERSE 10.7

etam vibhutim yogam cha mama yo vetti tattvatah so ’vikampena yogena yujyate natra sanshayah

Translation :The one who knows the truth of my glories and process of yoga becomes united with me by the process of Bhakti Yoga . There is no doubt of that.





VERSE 10.8

aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava-samanvitah

Translation :I am the source of everything; everything originates from me. The wise ones know about this, and they worship me with great faith and devotion.





VERSE 10.9

mach-chitta mad-gata-prana bodhayantah parasparam kathayantash cha mam nityam tushyanti cha ramanti cha

Translation :Those who have dedicated their life to me and fixed their minds on me, those people derive contentment and bliss in always enlightening others about me.





VERSE 10.10

tesham satata-yuktanam bhajatam priti-purvakam dadami buddhi-yogam tam yena mam upayanti te

Translation :Those who worship me with all their love and devotion. I always bestow supreme knowledge and inspiration upon them so they can attain me.


VERSE 10.11

tesham evanukampartham aham ajnana-jam tamah nashayamyatma-bhava-stho jnana-dipena bhasvata

Translation :Out of compassion for my devotees, I, who is there in hearts. Appear and destroy all the darkness that has been born there, with the light of supreme knowledge.





VERSE 10.12-10.13

arjuna uvacha

param brahma param dhama pavitram paramam bhavan purusham shashvatam divyam adi-devam ajam vibhum ahus tvam rishayah sarve devarshir naradas tatha

asito devalo vyasah svayam chaiva bravishi me

Translation :Arjuna then said: Hey Krishna , You’re supreme Divine Brahman , The supreme abode, The Purest. You’re the eternal supreme god, The Primal being, the effulgent, The Unborn, and the Greatest.

All the sages Narada , Asit , Deval , and Vyas , stated this. Now, you’re declaring it to be yourself.





VERSE 10.14

sarvam etad ritam manye yan mam vadasi keshava na hi te bhagavan vyaktim vidur deva na danavah

Translation : O Krishna , everything you’ve told me as I accept as truth. Neither Demons nor Demigods can understand your personality.





VERSE 10.15

swayam evatmanatmanam vettha tvam purushottama bhuta-bhavana bhutesha deva-deva jagat-pate

Translation :O supreme person, O creator of all beings, Master of all demigods, Master of the universe. You alone know about yourself.


VERSE 10.16-10.17

vaktum arhasyasheshena divya hyatma-vibhutayah yabhir vibhutibhir lokan imams tvam vyapya tishthasi katham vidyam aham yogins tvam sada parichintayan keshu keshu cha bhaveshu chintyo ’si bhagavan maya

Translation :O supreme god, please describe to me your diving power by which you penetrate the entire universe. How can I constantly think of you? How can I meditate and think of you?

And when I meditate, what in what form of you should in mediate upon?





VERSE 10.18

vistarenatmano yogam vibhutim cha janardana bhuyah kathaya triptir hi shrinvato nasti me ’mritam

Translation :O Janardhan a, kindly tell me again in detail about your glories and mystic powers. I never get satiated by hearing about you. It’s like nectar for me.





VERSE 10.19

sarvam etad ritam manye yan mam vadasi keshava na hi te bhagavan vyaktim vidur deva na danavah

Translation :Lord Krishna then said to Arjuna : Listen, O best of Kuru’s , there’s no limit to my powers. I shall now explain the divine glories to you. But I shall explain to you those divine splendors of mine that are the most outstanding.


VERSE 10.20

aham atma guḍakesha sarva-bhutashaya-sthitah

aham adish cha madhyam cha bhutanam anta eva cha

Translation :O Arjuna , I am the one who resides in all the living beings. I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of all creatures in this entire universe.





VERSE 10.21

adityanam aham vishnur jyotisham ravir anshuman marichir marutam asmi nakshatranam aham shashi

Translation :I am Vishnu , amongst the son of Aditi ( Adityas ). I am the sun amongst the blazing lights. I am Marichi amongst the Maruts. And I am the moon amongst the stars in the Night Sky.





VERSE 10.22

vedanam sama-vedo ’smi devanam asmi vasavah indriyanam manash chasmi bhutanam asmi chetana

Translation :Amongst the Vedas , I am the Sama Veda . Amongst the demigods, I am Indra . Amongst all the senses, I am the Mind.Amongst all the living creatures, I am the consciousness.


VERSE 10.23

rudranam shankarash chasmi vittesho yaksha-rakshasam vasunam pavakash chasmi meruh shikharinam aham

Translation :Amongst the Rudras , I am Shankar ; Amongst the Yakshas and Demons, I am the Kuber .I am Agni amongst the Vasus . I am Meru amongst Mountains.





VERSE 10.24

purodhasam cha mukhyam mam viddhi partha brihaspatim senaninam aham skandah sarasam asmi sagarah

Translation :O Partha , amongst the priests, knows me as Brahspati . Amongst the Military generals, I am Kartikeya . Amongst the bodies of water, I am the ocean.





VERSE 10.25

maharshinam bhrigur aham giram asmyekam aksharam yajnanam japa-yajno ’smi sthavaranam himalayah

Translation :Of all the great sages, I am Bhrgu . Amongst all the sound, I am the transcendental sound “Om. ” Amongst all the sacrifices, I am the Japa . I am the Great Himalaya , amongst all the immovable things.





VERSE 10.26

ashvatthah sarva-vrikshanam devarshinam cha naradah gandharvanam chitrarathah siddhanam kapilo munih

Translation :Of all the trees, I am the Banyan tree. Amongst all the sages, I am Narada. I am Chiratha amongst all the Gandharvas . I am Kapila muni amongst all the Siddhas .





VERSE 10.27

uchchaihshravasam ashvanam viddhi mam amritodbhavam airavatam gajendranam naranam cha naradhipam

Translation :I am Ucchaisarva amongst all the horses, who was begotten from the ocean of nectar. Amongst the elephants, I am Airavata . Amongst the men, I am the King.


VERSE 10.28

ayudhanam aham vajram dhenunam asmi kamadhuk prajanash chasmi kandarpah sarpanam asmi vasukih

Translation :Among all the snakes, I am Anant. Among all the aquatics, I am Varun . Among all the deceased ancestors, I am the Aryama . And of all the dispensers of law, I am Yamaraj .





VERSE 10.29

anantash chasmi naganam varuno yadasam aham pitṝinam aryama chasmi yamah sanyamatam aham

Translation :Amongst all the weapons, I am thunderbolt. Amongst all the cows, I am Kaamdhenu . Amongst all the causes of procreation, I am the Kaamdev . And of all the serpents, I am Vasuki .





VERSE 10.30

prahladash chasmi daityanam kalah kalayatam aham mriganam cha mrigendro ’ham vainateyash cha pakshinam

Translation :Amongst all the demons, I am Prahlad . Amongst all the constraints, I am Time. Amongst all the animals, I am the Lion. I am Garuda amongst all the birds.





VERSE 10.31

pavanah pavatam asmi ramah shastra-bhritam aham jhashanam makarash chasmi srotasam asmi jahnavi

Translation :I am the wind amongst all the purifiers. I am Rama , amongst all the wielders of weapons. Amongst all the water creatures, I am the crocodile. I am the Ganges, amongst all the rivers.





VERSE 10.32

sarganam adir antash cha madhyam chaivaham arjuna adhyatma-vidya vidyanam vadah pravadatam aham

Translation :O Arjuna , I am the beginning, middle, and the end of all the creations. Of all the knowledge, I am the knowledge of self. Amongst all the debates, I am the logical conclusion.





VERSE 10.33

aksharanam a-karo ’smi dvandvah samasikasya cha aham evakshayah kalo dhataham vishvato-mukhah

Translation :Amongst all the letters, I am the first letter “A.” I am the dual amongst all the compounds. I am the endless, eternal flow of time. Amongst all the creators, I am Brahma .



VERSE 10.34

mrityuh sarva-harash chaham udbhavash cha bhavishyatam kirtih shrir vak cha nariram smritir medha dhritih Kshama

Translation : I am the death, and I am the origin of things that are yet to manifest. Amongst all the feminine, I am the fame, fine speech, abundance, intelligence, memory, forgiveness, and fearlessness.





VERSE 10.35

brihat-sama tatha samnam gayatri chhandasam aham masanam marga-shirsho ’ham ritunam kusumakarah

Translation :I am Brihatsama amongst all the hymns in Sama Veda . I am the Gayatri amongst all the Vedic rhythm. I am Margsheersh , amongst all the months present in the Hindu calendar. Amongst all the seasons, I am the beautiful spring that brings flowers.





VERSE 10.36

dyutam chhalayatam asmi tejas tejasvinam aham jayo ’smi vyavasayo ’smi sattvam sattvavatam aham

Translation :I am gambling amongst all the cheaters. Of all the splendid, I am the splendour. Amongst the victorious, I am the victory. I am the resolve of the resolute. I am the might of the mighty ones.





VERSE 10.37

vrishninam vasudevo ’smi pandavanam dhananjayah muninam apyaham vyasah kavinam ushana kavih

Translation :Amongst all the Vrsni dynasty, I am Krishna . Amongst all the Pandavas , I am Arjuna . Amongst all the philosophers, I am Vysa . Amongst all the great thinkers, I am Shukracharya .


VERSE 10.38

darḍo damayatam asmi nitir asmi jigishatam

maunam chaivasmi guhyanam jnanam jnanavatam aham

Translation :I am the enforced punishment amongst means of preventing chaos and riots. I am the proper conduct for those who desire victory and success. I am the silence, amongst all the secrets. I am the knowledge amongst all the wisdom.


VERSE 10.39

yach chapi sarva-bhutanam bijam tad aham arjuna na tad asti vina yat syan maya bhutam characharam

Translation :Amongst all the living creatures, I am the generating seed. O Arjuna , there is no moving or non-moving creature that can exist without me.





VERSE 10.40

nanto ’sti mama divyanam vibhutinam parantapa esha tuddeshatah prokto vibhuter vistaro maya

Translation :O conqueror of enemies, there is no limit to my divine creations and manifestations. What I have stated to you is merely a small fraction of my infinite glory.





VERSE 10.41

yad yad vibhutimat sattvam shrimad urjitam eva va

tat tad evavagachchha tvam mama tejo ’nsha-sambhavam

Translation :Whatever you see that exists around you and is magnificent and beautiful has manifested itself from the spark of my power.





VERSE 10.42

atha va bahunaitena kim jnatena tavarjuna vishtabhyaham idam kritsnam ekanshena sthito jagat

Translation :What’s the need of knowing all this knowledge, My Dear Arjuna? Simply know that It’s me who’s the fraction of power penetrates the entire universe and supports the creation of all living beings.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 11

DIVINE VISION & THE INFINITE COSMIC FORM

(VISHWARUP DARSHAN YOGA)





A fter knowing about Lord Shri Krishna's glories and splendor, Arjuna asks the supreme lord to show his infinite universal cosmic form- The form that has all the universes and all the creations of Lord Krishna .

Lord Krishna then grants the divine vision to Arjuna to see the infinite cosmic form of Lord Krishna . After getting the heavenly vision, Arjuna sees Lord Krishna in his cosmic form. Arjuna trembles with fear by seeing the god's radiance, unlimited arms, and hands.

The appearance of the universal form of Lord Krishna is explained beautifully in this chapter.





VERSE 11.1

arjuna uvacha

mad-anugrahaya paramam guhyam adhyatma-sanjnitam yat tvayoktam vachas tena moho ’yam vigato mama

Translation : Arjuna said: With all your mercy, you have revealed the greatest confidential spiritual knowledge to me. This has now dispelled all the bewilderment from my mind.





VERSE 11.2

bhavapyayau hi bhutanam shrutau vistarasho maya tvattah kamala-patraksha mahatmyam api chavyayam

Translation :O lotus-eyed one, I have heard about the detailed creation and destruction of all human beings and about your eternal glories.





VERSE 11.3

evam etad yathattha tvam atmanam parameshvara drashtum ichchhami te rupam aishwaram purushottama

Translation :O Supreme Lord, you are exactly like the way you described yourself as. Now I desire to see your divine form.





VERSE 11.4

manyase yadi tach chhakyam maya drashtum iti prabho yogeshvara tato me tvam darshayatmanam avyayam

Translation : O Lord, If you think that I am strong enough to see your immortal cosmic form, then kindly show it to me.





VERSE 11.5

shri-bhagavan uvacha

pashya me partha rupani shatasho ’tha sahasrashah nana-vidhani divyani nana-varnakritini cha

Translation :The Supreme Shri Krishna said: My unlimited wonderful forms are of various shapes, colors, and sizes.





VERSE 11.6

pashyadityan vasun rudran ashvinau marutas tatha bahuny adrishta-purvani pashyashcharyani bharata

Translation :O scion of Bharatas, Aditiyas ( 12 sons of Aditi) , Vasus (Eight), The Ashwini Kumars (twins), Maruts (Forty-Nine), and many more of these multifarious marvels have never been revealed before.



VERSE 11.7

ihaika-stham jagat kritsnam pashyadya sa-characharam mama dehe guḍakesha yach chanyad drashtum ichchhasi

Translation :Behold now, O conquer of sleep, The entire universe, including all moving and non-moving creatures assembled together in my universal form. Observe all that you desire to see in this universal form of mine.





VERSE 11.8

na tu mam shakyase drashtum anenaiva sva-chakshusha divyam dadami te chakshuh pashya me yogam aishwaram

Translation :Yet you’ll not be able to see my divine form from these eyes of yours, for this I will give you divine vision. Behold my majestic splendor!





VERSE 11.9

sanjaya uvacha

evam uktva tato rajan maha-yogeshvaro harih darshayam asa parthaya paramam rupam aishwaram

Translation :Sanjaya said to King Dhritrashtra: O King, Having spoken thus to Partha , The supreme Lord of yoga , Shri Krishna displayed his divine and universal form to Arjuna .





VERSE 11.10 AND 11.11

aneka-vaktra-nayanam anekadbhuta-darshanam aneka-divyabharanam divyanekodyatayudham divya-malyambara-dharam divya-gandhanulepanam

sarvashcharya-mayam devam anantam vishvato-mukham

Translation :Shri Krishna then revealed his cosmic form with unlimited faces and eyes, decorated with my divine ornaments and raising many kinds of divine weapons. He was decorated with many kinds of garments and garlands and anointed with heavenly sweet fragrances. He revealed himself as the most wonderful, infinite lord whose energy was penetrating the entire universe.





VERSE 11.12

divi surya-sahasrasya bhaved yugapad utthita

yadi bhah sadrishi sa syad bhasas tasya mahatmanah

Translation :Suppose thousands of suns would appear in the sky together in the sky simultaneously. Even such splendor would not match the splendor of the great form of Lord Krishna .





VERSE 11.13

tatraika-stham jagat kritsnam pravibhaktam anekadha apashyad deva-devasya sharire panḍavas tada

Translation :There at that moment, Arjuna could see the

entire cosmos and its totality, within that universal form of Gods of demigods.





VERSE 11.14

tatah sa vismayavishto hrishta-roma dhananjayah pranamya shirasa devam kritanjalir abhashata

Translation :Overwhelmed Arjuna with his hair standing on the end, with folded hands, bowed to Lord Krishna and addressed him thus.





VERSE 11.15

arjuna uvacha

pashyami devans tava deva dehe sarvans tatha bhuta-vishesha-sanghan brahmanam isham kamalasana-stham rishinsh cha sarvan uragansh cha divyan

Translation : Arjuna then said: O Master, I can see within your body all the demigods and the hosts of different creatures. I can see Brahma , seated on a lotus. I can see Shiva and all the sages and celestial serpents.





VERSE 11.16

aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram pashyami tvam sarvato ’nanta-rupam nantam na madhyam na punas tavadim pashyami vishveshvara vishva-rupa

Translation :O Lord of the universe, I can see your infinite form with countless arms, bellies, faces, and eyes. I don’t see any beginning, middle, or end of your universal form.





VERSE 11.17

kiritinam gadinam chakrinam cha tejo-rashim sarvato diptimantam

pashyami tvam durnirikshyam samantad diptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam

Translation :I can see your form, decorated with a crown, armed with club and dice. A mass of blazing lights is illuminating all around you, similar to the lights of the sun, making it difficult to look upon you.





VERSE 11.18

tvam aksharam paramam veditavyam tvam asya vishvasya param nidhanam tvam avyayah shashvata-dharma-gopta sanatanas tvam purusho mato me

Translation :You’re the eternal absolute truth known by the Vedas . You’re the ultimate abode of all the universe. You support all the creations and creatures of this universe. You’re the ultimate protector of Dharma . And you’re the ultimate supreme personality of this universe.



VERSE 11.19

anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam ananta-bahum shashi-surya-netram pashyami tvam dipta-hutasha-vaktram sva-tejasa vishvam idam tapantam

Translation :You’re without any beginning, middle and end; Your unlimited power has no limits. You have infinitely long arms; your eyes are like the sun and the moon. The entire universe is warmed by the radiance of your emanating rays of light.





VERSE 11.20

dyav a-prithivyor idam antaram hi vyaptam tvayaikena dishash cha sarvah drishtvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedam loka-trayam pravyathitam mahatman

Translation :O Greatest of all beings, the whole universe is penetrated by you and you alone. By seeing your wonderful and terrifying form, all the three worlds tremble in fear.





VERSE 11.21

ami hi tvam sura-sangha vishanti kechid bhitah pranjalayo grinanti

svastity uktva maharshi-siddha-sanghah stuvanti tvam stutibhih pushkalabhih

Translation :All the demigods take shelter in you and offer prayer with their folded hands. The great sages and perfected beings offer prayers to you with hymns and auspicious chants.





VERSE 11.22

rudraditya vasavo ye cha sadhya

vishve ’shvinau marutash choshmapash cha gandharva-yakshasura-siddha-sangha vikshante tvam vismitash chaiva sarve

Translation :The Rudras, Adityas , Vasus, Vishwadevas , Sadhyas , Ashwini Kumars , Maruts , Gandharvas, Ancestors, Asuras, Yakshas , and Siddhas are beheld you and are struck in wonder.





VERSE 11.23

rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padam bahudaram bahu-danshtra-karalam drishtva lokah pravyathitas tathaham

Translation :Oh, supreme lord, seeing your immense, magnificent universal form with countless mouths, eyes, arms, thighs, feet, stomach, and teeth. All the world and its creatures are terrified, along with me.





VERSE 11.24

nabhah-sprisham diptam aneka-varnam vyattananam dipta-vishala-netram drishtva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atma dhritim na vindami shamam cha vishno

Translation :Oh my lord Vishnu , looking upon your brilliant form of countless colors that are touching the sky, with massive open mouth and blazing eyes, I tremble from within with fear and can’t maintain my peace of mind.





VERSE 11.25

danshtra-karalani cha te mukhani drishtvaiva kalanala-sannibhani disho na jane na labhe cha sharma prasida devesha jagan-nivasa

Translation :After seeing your countless mouth with countless teeth that terrifies me, it resembles the raging fire of the annihilation of the universe. I now have lost myself and the direction I want to go. O Supreme God, please have mercy on me; you’re the abode of all the universe.





VERSE 11.26 AND 11.27

ami cha tvam dhritarashtrasya putrah sarve sahaivavani-pala-sanghaih bhishmo dronah suta-putras tathasau sahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih vaktrani te tvaramana vishanti danshtra-karalani bhayanakani kechid vilagna dashanantareshu sandrishyante churnitair uttamangaih

Translation :I can see that all the sons of Dhritrashtra , along with their royal allies, including Bhima , Karna , Dronacharaya , and also the warriors from our side. All of them are rushing towards your mouth and are being caught between your massive teeth.





VERSE 11.28 AND 11.29

yatha nadinam bahavo ’mbu-vegah samudram evabhimukha dravanti tatha tavami nara-loka-vira vishanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga vishanti nashaya samriddha-vegah tathaiva nashaya vishanti lokas tavapi vaktrani samriddha-vegah

Translation :As rivers flow towards the ocean and eventually fall into it, similarly, all these legendary warriors are falling into your fiery mouths. Just as moths run into the fire with swift, similarly, all the world rushes into your mouth for their destruction.





VERSE 11.30

lelihyase grasamanah samantal

lokan samagran vadanair jvaladbhih tejobhir apurya jagat samagram bhasas tavograh pratapanti vishno

Translation :With your fiery tongue, you repeatedly lick your lips. Oh Lord Vishnu, you are penetrating the entire universe with your radiant rays.





VERSE 11.31

akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo namo ’stu te deva-vara prasida

vijnatum ichchhami bhavantam adyam na hi prajanami tava pravrittim

Translation :Oh, my supreme lord, with such fierce form, tell me who you are. Bestow your mercy on me; I can’t understand your nature and workings.



VERSE 11.32

shri-bhagavan uvacha

kalo ’smi loka-kshaya-krit pravriddho lokan samahartum iha pravrittah

rite ’pi tvam na bhavishyanti sarve ye ’vasthitah pratyanikeshu yodhah

Translation :Lord Krishna then said: I am time, the destroyer of all the worlds, I come forth to destroy all the living beings. Even without your participation, the warriors that are lined up on the opposite side will be killed.





VERSE 11.33

tasmat tvam uttishtha yasho labhasva

jitva shatrun bhunkshva rajyam samriddham mayaivaite nihatah purvam eva

nimitta-matram bhava savya-sachin

Translation :Therefore Arjuna , Arise and attain glory! Conquer your enemies and enjoy your prosperous empire. O best among the archers, these warriors standing in front of you are already slain by me. You’re just an instrument of my work.





VERSE 11.34

dronam cha bhishmam cha jayadratham cha karnam tathanyan api yodha-viran

maya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathishtha yudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan

Translation : Dronacharya , Bheeshma, Jayadratha, Karna, and other heroic soldiers have already been slain by me. So without being disturbed by fear— Fight! Fight, and you’ll certainly achieve victory in this battle over your enemies.





VERSE 11.35

sanjaya uvacha

etach chhrutva vachanam keshavasya kritanjalir vepamanah kiriti namaskritva bhuya evaha krishnam sa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya

Translation :Sanjaya then said: Hearing these words of Shri Krishna , Arjuna trembled. He folded his palms and bowed down in front of Lord Krishna . Overwhelmed with fear, he spoke in a faltering voice to Shri Krishna .





VERSE 11.36

arjuna uvacha

sthane hrishikesha tava prakirtya jagat prahrishyaty anurajyate cha rakshansi bhitani disho dravanti sarve namasyanti cha siddha-sanghah

Translation : Arjuna said: Ohh, Master of all the senses, It’s appropriate that the whole universe praises you and enjoys it. Demons struck with terror and fear whenever they see you and fly away in all directions. Saints and perfected beings bow down to you with all their devotion and respect.





VERSE 11.37

kasmach cha te na nameran mahatman gariyase brahmano ’py adi-kartre ananta devesha jagan-nivasa

tvam aksharam sad-asat tat param yat

Translation :O great one, you’re greater than Lord Brahma —who’s the creator of this universe, why should they not bow down before you.





VERSE 11.38

tvam adi-devah purushah puranas tvam asya vishvasya param nidhanam vettasi vedyam cha param cha dhama tvaya tatam vishvam ananta-rupa

Translation :You’re supreme original divine personality; You’re the sole resting refuge for the entire universe and its beings. You’re the object of knowledge and the knower. You’re the supreme divine abode. Your infinite forms penetrate the entire universe.


VERSE 11.39

vayur yamo ’gnir varunah shashankah prajapatis tvam prapitamahash cha namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kritvah punash cha bhuyo ’pi namo namas te

Translation :You’re Vayu (the deity of wind ), You’re Yamaraj (the deity of death), You’re Agni (The deity of fire), You’re Varun (deity of water) and You’re Chandra (the moon god).

You’re Brahma, the creator of the world and all it’s beings. I offer you my greetings thousand times, again and again.





VERSE 11.40

namah purastad atha prishthatas te

namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva ananta-viryamita-vikramas tvam sarvam samapnoshi tato ’si sarvah

Translation :O Lord of infinite strength, all my greetings to you from the front and the rear. My greetings to from all the directions. You have endless might; hence you penetrate all the things and beings of this universe. Hence. You’re everything.





VERSE 11.41 AND 11.42

sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam he krishna he yadava he sakheti ajanata mahimanam tavedam maya pramadat pranayena vapi yach chavahasartham asat-krito ’si vihara-shayyasana-bhojaneshu

eko ’tha vapy achyuta tat-samaksham tat kshamaye tvam aham aprameyam

Translation : I was not aware of your greatness, my lord. I addressed you as “O Krishna ,” “O Yadava ,” and “O Dear Friend.” I disrespected you while eating, playing, relaxing, and sitting together; I disrespected you unknowingly in person and front of others—For all of that, I beg forgiveness.


VERSE 11.43

pitasi lokasya characharasya

tvam asya pujyash cha gurur gariyan

na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikah kuto ’nyo loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhava

Translation :You’re the father of this entire universe and its moving and non-moving creatures. You deserve worship and are a supreme spiritual teacher. There’s no one equal to you in this whole world. There’s no one greater than you, O master of incomparable strength.





VERSE 11.44

tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam prasadaye tvam aham isham iḍyam piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh priyah priyayarhasi deva soḍhum

Translation :Therefore, O Lord, I want to bow down and prostrate in front of you; I pray for your grace unto me. O Lord, please forgive me. Just as a father forgives his son, a friend forgives his/her friend, and a lover forgive his/her lover.





VERSE 11.45

adrishta-purvam hrishito ’smi drishtva bhayena cha pravyathitam mano me tad eva me darshaya deva rupam prasida devesha jagan-nivasa

Translation :I am glad to see your universal form that I have never seen before. I feel great pleasure, and still, my mind shakes with fear. Thus, my lord shows some mercy on me and again comes back to your pleasing form of Narayana . O Lord of Lords, O refuge of the universe.





VERSE 11.46

pitasi lokasya characharasya

tvam asya pujyash cha gurur gariyan

na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikah kuto ’nyo loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhava

Translation :With thousands of arms, O Lord reveals to me your pleasing form with four-arms, carrying the club(mace) and Sudarshana Chakra (Disc Weapon) in your hands.





VERSE 11.47

shri-bhagavan uvacha

maya prasannena tavarjunedam rupam param darshitam atma-yogat tejo-mayam vishvam anantam adyam

yan me tvad anyena na drishta-purvam

Translation : Lord Shri Krishna then said: Hey Arjuna, being pleased with you, I gave you the divine vision, through which you can see my radiant, infinite and cosmic form. Before you, no one has ever seen this universal divine form.





VERSE 11.48

na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair na cha kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraih evam-rupah shakya aham nri-loke drashtum tvad anyena kuru-pravira

Translation :O best of Kurus , No mortal in this entire world has ever seen this universal form. Neither by practicing Vedic austerities, nor by sacrifice, nor by chanting mantras , doing Vedic rituals , or doing any charity work.





VERSE 11.49

ma te vyatha ma cha vimuḍha-bhavo drishtva rupam ghoram idrin mamedam vyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvam tad eva me rupam idam prapashya

Translation :Don’t get puzzled or fearful by looking at this enormous, terrifying form of mine. Stay calm and fearless. Behold once again to see the pleasing form of mine you desire to see.





VERSE 11.50

sanjaya uvacha

ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktva svakam rupam darshayam asa bhuyah ashvasayam asa cha bhitam enam bhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma

Translation :Sanjaya then said: After speaking this, Son of Vasudev ( Lord Shri Krishna ) displayed his pleasing four-armed form. After that, he resumed back to his gentle two-armed human form, consoling the fearful Arjuna .



VERSE 11.51

arjuna uvacha

drishtvedam manusham rupam tava saumyam janardana idanim asmi samvrittah sa-chetah prakritim gatah

Translation : Arjuna said: O Lord Krishna , after looking at your pleasing human form, my mind is peaceful once again, and I have regained my calm.





VERSE 11.52 AND 11.53

shri-bhagavan uvacha

su-durdarsham idam rupam drishtavan asi yan mama deva apy asya rupasya nityam darshana-kankshinah naham vedair na tapasa na danena na chejyaya

shakya evam-vidho drashtum drishtavan asi mam yatha

Translation : Supreme Lord Shri Krishna said: This universal cosmic form is complicated to see. Even the demigods are eager to catch a glimpse of this form. Neither by the study of Vedas , nor by the penance, nor by the sacrifices and rituals and nor by the charity this universal form of me, that you have just seen, can be revealed in front of any being.





VERSE 11.54

bhaktya tv ananyaya shakya aham evam-vidho ’rjuna jnatum drashtum cha tattvena praveshtum cha parantapa

Translation :O my Arjuna , Only with pure devotion and Bhakti-Yog , can I be entirely known as I am. Only by pure passion can one attain the divine vision and indeed be in union with me.



VERSE 11.55

mat-karma-krin mat-paramo mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitah nirvairah sarva-bhuteshu yah sa mam eti pandava

Translation :My devotes who perform their Karma for my sake, setting themselves free from all the worldly attachments, who live without any hatred with other creatures and beings, such devotees surely attain me.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 12

FAITH, LOVE, DEVOTION & BLISS

(BHAKTI YOGA)




I n this chapter, Arjuna asks the supreme lord about the two different types of yogis. He also asks the supreme lord, who he considers superior among the two kinds of yogis .

Krishna then explains who he considers the superior among the two. He describes the two different ways of worshipping . Lord Shri Krishna tells Arjuna why worshiping his personal form is better and more comfortable for an individual.

In this chapter, the Supreme lord also explains how one can

cultivate unwavering devotion for Lord Krishna .





VERSE 12.1

arjuna uvacha

evam satata-yukta ye bhaktas tvam paryupasate

ye chapy akṣharam avyaktam teṣham ke yoga-vittamah

Translation : Arjuna asked: Who do you think is perfectly situated in yoga ? The one who is constantly devoted in your pleasing personal form or the one who is devoted and worships your formless imperishable universal form.





VERSE 12.2

shri-bhagavan uvacha

mayy aveshya mano ye mam nitya-yukta upasate shraddhaya parayopetas te me yuktatama matah

Translation :Supreme Lord then said: Those who fix their unwavering mind on me, who continuously

meditate upon me with all the faith and devotion. According to me, they’re the best yogis .



VERSE 12.3 & VERSE 12.4

ye tv akṣharam anirdeshyam avyaktam paryupasate sarvatra-gam achintyancha kuṭa-stham achalandhruvam sanniyamyendriya-gramam sarvatra sama-buddhayah

te prapnuvanti mam eva sarva-bhuta-hite ratah

Translation :However, those who restrain their senses are mentally calm and composed in every situation. Who is always engaged in helping all the beings? Those who worship my universal formless,

immortal, indescribable, unmanifested, all penetrating, unimaginable, constant, infinite and immovable form, also attain me.





VERSE 12.5

klesho ’dhikataras teṣham avyaktasakta-chetasam avyakta hi gatir duhkham dehavadbhir avapyate

Translation :For those who are devoting their minds to the worship on the unmanifest form of mine, the path of liberation and realization will be very difficult for them. Worship of the unmanifested form is troublesome for the embodied beings.





VERSE 12.6 & VERSE 12.7

ye tu sarvani karmani mayi sannyasya mat-parah ananyenaiva yogena mam dhyayanta upasate teṣham aham samuddharta mṛityu-samsara-sagarat bhavami na chirat partha mayy aveshita-chetasam

Translation :O Partha , but those who dedicate all their Karma to me offer it to me, who takes abode in me and considers me the end goal. Those who are fully absorbed in me with exclusive devotion to me. I swiftly take their consciousness from the ocean of birth and death and unite them with me.





VERSE 12.8

mayy eva mana adhatsva mayi buddhim niveshaya nivasiṣhyasi mayy eva ata urdhvam na sanshayah

Translation :Fix your unwavering mind and intellect on me. After that, you’ll always live with me without any doubt.





VERSE 12.9

atha chittam samadhatum na shaknoṣhi mayi sthiram abhyasa-yogena tato mam ichchhaptum dhananjaya

Translation : O Arjuna , if you’re not able to fix your mind steadily upon me. Then try to attain me by the practice of Bhakti-Yoga and restrain your mind from worldly affairs.





VERSE 12.10

abhyase ’py asamartho ’si mat-karma-paramo bhava mad-artham api karmani kurvan siddhim avapsyasi

Translation :If you’re still not able to practice Bhakti- Yoga and cannot remember me with devotion. Then try to offer work for me, do some devotional services for me, and you’ll eventually reach the stage of perfection soon.





VERSE 12.11

athaitad apy ashakto ’si kartum mad-yogam ashritah sarva-karma-phala-tyagam tatah kuru yatatmavan

Translation :If you even fail to offer me the work, try to give up on your actions' fruits and offer those results on me while you control your mind.





VERSE 12.12

shreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj jnanad dhyanam vishiṣhyate dhyanat karma-phala-tyagas tyagach chhantir anantaram

Translation :Even if you’re not able to follow my given instructions, you must dedicate yourself to the cultivation of knowledge. However, Meditation is much better than cultivating knowledge.





VERSE 12.13 & VERSE 12.14

adveṣhṭa sarva-bhutanam maitrah karuna eva cha nirmamo nirahankarah sama-duhkha-sukhah kṣhami santuṣhṭah satatam yogi yatatma dṛiḍha-nishchayah mayy arpita-mano-buddhir yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah

Translation :The devotees who are away from hatred have love and compassion for all beings. Devotees who are free from the attachments, egotism, calm in every situation, happiness or distress, are forgiving, self-satisfied, have firm determination, and whose mind and intelligence are always engaged in meditating on my name. Such devotees are still very dear to me.





VERSE 12.15

yasman nodvijate loko lokan nodvijate cha yah harshamarsha-bhayodvegair mukto yah sa cha me priyah

Translation :Those who aren't a source of distress for others, don't get agitated by anything, are equally calm in pain and pleasure, and are free from any fear, anxiety, anger, happiness are dear to me.



VERSE 12.16

anapekṣhah shuchir dakṣha udasino gata-vyathah sarvarambha-parityagi yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah

Translation :The one who is not concerned with worldly gains, which is pure, skillful, free from selfish desires such devotees, is very dear to me.





VERSE 12.17

yo na hṛiṣhyati na dveṣhṭi na shochati na kankṣhati shubhashubha-parityagi bhaktiman yah sa me priyah

Translation :Devotees who don’t enjoy the mundane pleasure, nor loses hope in distress and worldly pain, the one who neither cries in loss nor craves for any gain, who gives up both good and evil deeds and all full of devotion and faith are very close to my heart.





VERSE 12.18 & VERSE 12.19

samah shatrau cha mitre cha tatha manapamanayoh shitoṣhna-sukha-duhkheṣhu samah sanga-vivarjitah tulya-ninda-stutir mauni santuṣhṭo yena kenachit aniketah sthira-matir bhaktiman me priyo narah

Translation :My devotees equal their friend and foes, maintain poise in fame and dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and sorrows, detached from unfavorable conditions. Who has control over his speech, content in all conditions, no attachments to any residence and whose intellect is fixed on my name, such persons are dear to me.


VERSE 12.20

ye tu dharmyamṛitam idam yathoktam paryupasate shraddadhana mat-parama bhaktas te ’tiva me priyah

Translation :Those who have faith and honour for this nectar of wisdom and the eternal path of Dharma , and consider me as their supreme goal of life are very dear to me.


✽✽✽





CHAPTER 13





FIELD & THE KNOWER OF THE FIELD

(Kshetra Kshetrajnna Vibhaga Yoga)





T his chapter introduces the field (Kshetra ) and the field's knower (Kshetrajana ). Lord Krishna explains that field or Kshetra is not limited to the physical body. The field is much more than that. He describes the different components of the field in this chapter through his divine dialogues with Arjuna .

Lord Krishna also explains how our thoughts and actions contribute to the shape of our destiny. He also explains god and how god penetrates the entire universe and its creations.

He also explains the supreme soul and the material nature of living beings. How cause and effects shape the universe and how one can work on the causes, correct them and get the different effects and results.




VERSE 13.1

arjuna uvacha

prakṛitim puruṣham chaiva kṣhetram kṣhetra-jnam eva cha etad veditum ichchhami jnanam jneyam cha keshava

Translation :Arjuna said, “O Krishna , I wish to know about Prakrti (material nature) Purush, Kshetra and kshetrajna ”.and I wish to know is true knowledge and the goal of this knowledge?





VERSE 13.2

shri-bhagavan uvacha

idam shariram kaunteya kṣhetram ity abhidhiyate etad yo vetti tam prahuh kṣhetra-jna iti tad-vidah

Translation :Lord Shri Krishna replied: O Arjuna , the body can be considered as kshetra (the field of activities), and the one who knows the body is considered kshetrajna (the knower of the field). This is said by the wise who are aware of the body's truth.





VERSE 13.3

kṣhetra-jnam chapi mam viddhi sarva-kṣhetreṣhu bharata kṣhetra-kṣhetrajnayor jnanam yat taj jnanam matam mama

Translation :O decedent of Bharata, I know about all the fields of activity. I know about the understanding of the body as the field of activities.





VERSE 13.4

tat kṣhetram yach cha yadṛik cha yad-vikari yatash cha yat sa cha yo yat-prabhavash cha tat samasena me shṛinu

Translation :Now listen to me, and I will brief you about what that field is, what it consists and what exactly its nature is. I will also explain how the transformations and changes occur in it, from where it originated and who the knower of this field is, and the influence and power of that knower.





VERSE 13.5

ṛiṣhibhir bahudha gitam chhandobhir vividhaih pṛithak brahma-sutra-padaish chaiva hetumadbhir vinishchitaih

Translation :The great sages were the knower of this field; they have sung the knowledge about this field in many different ways. It’s been mentioned in the Vedas and various Vedic Hymns and is especially revealed in the Brahma Sutras or Vedanta Sutras with logic and evidence.





VERSE 13.6

maha-bhutany ahankaro buddhir avyaktam eva cha indriyani dashaikam cha pancha chendriya-gocharah

Translation :The field of activities is made up of five elements, Ego, Intellect, the unmanifest matter, Eleven senses (the mind, ten knowledgeable senses, five working senses), and Five objects of senses.





VERSE 13.7

ichchha dveṣhah sukham duhkham sanghatash chetana dhṛitih etat kṣhetram samasena sa-vikaram udahṛitam

Translation :Desire and Hatred, Happiness and Sorrow, the body, the consciousness, and the Determination–All these can be considered its field.





VERSE 13.8, 13.9, 13.10 ,13.11 & 13.12

amanitvam adambhitvam ahinsa kṣhantir arjavam acharyopasanam shaucham sthairyam atma-vinigrahah indriyartheṣhu vairagyam anahankara eva cha

janma-mṛityu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-doṣhanudarshanam asaktir anabhiṣhvangah putra-dara-gṛihadiṣhu

nityam cha sama-chittatvam iṣhṭaniṣhṭopapattiṣhu mayi chananya-yogena bhaktir avyabhicharini vivikta-desha-sevitvam aratir jana-sansadi

Translation :Desirelessness, Humbleness, Non-Violence, Freedom from dishonesty, Forgiveness, Simplicity, Cleanliness of the Mind and the body, service of the teachers and masters, Self-Control, Steadiness, Detachment from the Sensory Pleasures, Absence of false ego, Knowledge of misery of birth, death, disease and old age.

Detachment from the neediness of wife, children, and household life. A constant state of mind in events of desired and undesired events and conditions in life. Exclusive, Constant, and Firm devotion unto me.

Freedom from a desire to socialize with mundane society, Constant devotion and determination towards attaining spiritual Knowledge, self- realization, and constant pursuit to achieve the Absolute truth–All these can be considered Knowledge, and rest everything can be regarded as Ignorance according to me.





VERSE 13.13

jneyam yat tat pravakṣhyami yaj jnatvamṛitam ashnute anadi mat-param brahma na sat tan nasad uchyate

Translation :I shall now explain to you the object of knowledge and what needs to be known, and knowing which one can be immortal. It is the eternal Brahman , which lies beyond cause and effect.





VERSE 13.14

sarvatah pani-padam tat sarvato ’kṣhi-shiro-mukham sarvatah shrutimal loke sarvam avṛitya tiṣhṭhati

Translation :His hands, feet, eyes, heads, and faces are present everywhere. His ears are present everywhere. He penetrates the entire universe.

VERSE 13.15

sarvendriya-gunabhasam sarvendriya-vivarjitam asaktam sarva-bhṛich chaiva nirgunam guna-bhoktṛi cha

Translation :He illuminates all the sense-objects, yet he is without all the senses; he is not attached to anything, yet he maintains all. Although he is without material attributes, He is the master of all the material nature and characteristics.





VERSE 13.16

bahir antash cha bhutanam acharam charam eva cha sukṣhmatvat tad avijneyam dura-stham chantike cha tat

Translation :He resides inside and outside of all the living and non-living creatures. He’s subtle yet difficult to understand. He is very far, however, very near.





VERSE 13.17

avibhaktam cha bhuteṣhu vibhaktam iva cha sthitam bhuta-bhartṛi cha taj jneyam grasiṣhnu prabhaviṣhnu cha

Translation :Although he can’t be divided among all the beings, he is indivisible. Know him as the creator, destroyer, and the Maintainer.





VERSE 13.18

jyotiṣham api taj jyotis tamasah param uchyate

jnanam jneyam jnana-gamyam hṛidi sarvasya viṣhṭhitam

Translation :He is considered the light source in all luminaries; he is beyond the darkness. He can be regarded as knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the ultimate goal of knowledge.


VERSE 13.19

iti kṣhetram tatha jnanam jneyam choktam samasatah mad-bhakta etad vijnaya mad-bhavayopapadyate

Translation :I have now explained your nature of the field, the significance of the knowledge, and the object of knowledge. My devotees can understand all of this, and hence by knowing this, they can attain my love.





VERSE 13.20

prakṛitim puruṣham chaiva viddhy anadi ubhav api vikaransh cha gunansh chaiva viddhi prakṛiti-sambhavan

Translation :Understand, both the Prakriti (material nature) and the Purusha ( individual souls) are without beginning. All the transformations of the body and modes of nature are originated from material energy.



VERSE 13.21

karya-karana-kartṛitve hetuh prakṛitir uchyate puruṣhah sukha-duhkhanam bhoktṛitve hetur uchyate

Translation :If you consider the creations in this universe, Material energy is the source of all-cause and effect. All the living creatures are the cause of their happiness and distress.


VERSE 13.22

puruṣhah prakṛiti-stho hi bhunkte prakṛiti-jan gunan karanam guna-sango ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

Translation :When the Purusha (individual soul) residing in Prakriti (material nature) enjoys the three Gunas , the association, enjoyment, and attachment to these gunas are entirely responsible for the birth and death of that Purusha in superior or inferior species in life.





VERSE 13.23

upadraṣhṭanumanta cha bharta bhokta maheshvarah paramatmeti chapy ukto dehe ’smin puruṣhah parah

Translation :Within this body also resides the supreme soul (super consciousness). He witnesses everything a person does; he is the ultimate controller, supporter, provider, and Enjoyer.





VERSE 13.24

ya evam vetti puruṣham prakṛitim cha gunaih saha sarvatha vartamano ’pi na sa bhuyo ’bhijayate

Translation :Those who are aware of this material nature, individual consciousness, and the supreme soul and their interaction will be liberated from the cycle of birth and death forever. It doesn’t matter what is the current circumstances of that person are.





VERSE 13.25

dhyanenatmani pashyanti kechid atmanam atmana anye sankhyena yogena karma-yogena chapare

Translation :There are different ways to attain a glimpse of the supreme soul. Some people try to see the ultimate soul in their hearts by meditating; some try to attain that by cultivating and pursuit the supreme knowledge, and others try to attain that by the path of Karma (action).





VERSE 13.26

anye tv evam ajanantah shrutvanyebhya upasate te ’pi chatitaranty eva mṛityum shruti-parayanah

Translation :Many people are unaware of this spiritual path of liberation. Still, if they hear this absolute truth from saints or sages, and with all the faith follow this path, they will also be liberated from this cycle of birth and death forever.





VERSE 13.27

yavat sanjayate kinchit sattvam sthavara-jangamam kṣhetra-kṣhetrajna-sanyogat tad viddhi bharatarṣhabha

Translation :O best of the Bharata’s , whatever you see in this universe moving or non-moving is the manifestation of the combination of the field and the knower of the field.





VERSE 13.28

samam sarveṣhu bhuteṣhu tiṣhṭhantam parameshvaram vinashyatsv avinashyantam yah pashyati sa pashyati

Translation :The one who truly understands and sees the Paramatma (super consciousness) residing in all the beings in this entire universe and understands that neither the Paramatma nor the individual soul is perishable.





VERSE 13.29

samam pashyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam ishvaram na hinasty atmanatmanam tato yati param gatim

Translation :The one, who sees God as the supreme soul residing in all the places equally, never degrades in mind. Thus, that person reaches the supreme abode.


VERSE 13.30

prakṛityaiva cha karmani kriyamanani sarvashah yah pashyati tathatmanam akartaram sa pashyati

Translation :Such people understand that whatever actions the body performs are being done by the material nature and not by the embodied soul.





VERSE 13.31

yada bhuta-pṛithag-bhavam eka-stham anupashyati tata eva cha vistaram brahma sampadyate tada

Translation : When one truly sees the various types of living beings and observes their actions in the same material nature, and realizes that they are born from the material nature itself. That person attains the Brahman consciousness.





VERSE 13.32

anaditvan nirgunatvat paramatmayam avyayah sharira-stho ’pi kaunteya na karoti na lipyate

Translation :O son of Kunti , the supreme consciousness is imperishable, has no beginning and transcendental of any material nature. The supreme consciousness neither acts nor is affected or tainted by any actions done at the material level.





VERSE 13.33

yatha sarva-gatam saukṣhmyad akasham nopalipyate sarvatravasthito dehe tathatma nopalipyate

Translation :Everything is situated in the space but space is never contaminated with what it holds. Similarly, the soul never gets contaminated or tainted by the body's material nature and attributes.





VERSE 13.34

yatha prakashayaty ekah kṛitsnam lokam imam ravih kṣhetram kṣhetri tatha kṛitsnam prakashayati bharata

Translation :The way the sun enlightens the entire universe similarly, the soul enlightens the whole body.





VERSE 13.35

kṣhetra-kṣhetrajnayor evam antaram jnana-chakṣhuṣha bhuta-prakṛiti-mokṣham cha ye vidur yanti te param

Translation :Those who have the ultimate knowledge and are aware of the difference of material body, the knower of the body, and the process of liberation. Those people also attain the supreme abode.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 14

INFLUENCE OF MATERIAL NATURE

(GUNA TRAYA VIBHAG YOGA)





I n this chapter, Supreme lord Krishna explains his material nature how his material energy is the source of bodies and energies and eventually the mind and matter. He further explains more on the three modes of the material nature and how it influences a person's character.

Lord Krishna also mentions how a spiritual aspirant needs to deal with these three dominant forces of material nature. Lord also presents a solution to Arjuna to break free from these material nature modes, attach mind with god and attain liberation.





VERSE 14.1

shri-bhagavan uvacha

param bhuyah pravakṣhyami jnananam jnanam uttamam yaj jnatva munayah sarve param siddhim ito gatah

Translation :The divine lord Shri Krishna said; Now I will tell you about the most outstanding wisdom than any knowledge. By knowing this wisdom, all the greatest sages attained perfection and reached the supreme abode.





VERSE 14.2

idam jnanam upashritya mama sadharmyam agatah sarge ’pi nopajayante pralaye na vyathanti cha

Translation :Those who will acquire this knowledge will unite with me. That person will neither be born at the beginning of creation nor will that person be destroyed at annihilation.





VERSE 14.3 & VERSE 14.4

mama yonir mahad brahma tasmin garbham dadhamy aham sambhavah sarva-bhutanam tato bhavati bharata

sarva-yoniṣhu kaunteya murtayah sambhavanti yah tasam brahma mahad yonir aham bija-pradah pita

Translation :The entire material existence and nature is the womb for all the living beings. I am a father who gives the seeds in the womb of material nature. All the species taking birth are the individual soul that I impregnate.





VERSE 14.5

sattvam rajas tama iti gunah prakṛiti-sambhavah nibadhnanti maha-baho dehe dehinam avyayam

Translation :O Mighty Armed Arjuna , The material energy constitutes three different types of modes (Guna )—Goodness (Sattva) , Passion (Rajas ), and Ignorance (Tamas ). All these modes are responsible for binding the immortal soul to the material body.





VERSE 14.6

tatra sattvam nirmalatvat prakashakam anamayam sukha-sangena badhnati jnana-sangena chanagha

Translation :Among all these Guna (Modes), The Goodness Mode (Sattva Guna ) is the purest, full of well-being, and the greatest. It provides knowledge and happiness and binds it with the soul.





VERSE 14.7

rajo ragatmakam viddhi tṛiṣhna-sanga-samudbhavam tan nibadhnati kaunteya karma-sangena dehinam

Translation :O Mighty Arjuna , The Passion mode (Rajo Guna ) is manifested from affection, attachment, and desires to the fruits and results of actions.





VERSE 14.8

tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi mohanam sarva-dehinam pramadalasya-nidrabhis tan nibadhnati bharata

Translation :O Arjuna , the last mode is the worst one, born from ignorance, known as Ignorance (Tamo guna ). The cause of this is ignorance, too much sleep, and laziness.





VERSE 14.9

sattvam sukhe sanjayati rajah karmani bharata jnanam avṛitya tu tamah pramade sanjayaty uta

Translation :O Bharata , The Goodness ( Sattva Guna ) conditions one to materialistic happiness; Passion ( Rajo Guna ) conditions one’s soul towards Actions ( Karma) , And Ignorance ( Tamo Guna ) clouds wisdom and conditions oneself to delusion.





VERSE 14.10

rajas tamash chabhibhuya sattvam bhavati bharata rajah sattvam tamash chaiva tamah sattvam rajas tatha

Translation :Sometimes Goodness (Sattva) overpowers Passion (Rajas) and Ignorance (Tamas). Sometimes Passion (Rajas) prevails Goodness (Sattva) and Ignorance, and there are also times when Ignorance dominates Goodness (Sattva) and Passion (Rajas).





VERSE 14.11, 14.12 & 14.13

sarva-dvareṣhu dehe ’smin prakasha upajayate

jnanam yada tada vidyad vivṛiddham sattvam ity uta lobhah pravṛittir arambhah karmanam ashamah spṛiha rajasy etani jayante vivṛiddhe bharatarṣhabha aprakasho ’pravṛittish cha pramado moha eva cha tamasy etani jayante vivṛiddhe kuru-nandana

Translation :When the light of knowledge enlightens all the gates (senses) of the body, then the mode of goodness is manifested in the body and prevailing.

When the influence of greed, selfish desires, ambitions, restlessness, and worldly gain prevails over the person's senses. That means the Passion mode (Rajas ) has dominated the person. When inertia, laziness, ignorance, delusion, and darkness prevail over a person's mind and body, then it can be concluded—That the person is dominated by the Ignorance Mode (Tamas Guna ).





VERSE 14.14 & 14.15

yada sattve pravṛiddhe tu pralayam yati deha-bhṛit tadottama-vidam lokan amalan pratipadyate rajasi pralayam gatva karma-saṅgiṣhu jayate tatha pralinas tamasi muḍha-yoniṣhu jayate

Translation :When a person dies, and that person is under Goodness's dominance (Sattva Guna ), that person reaches the highest and the purest abode.

People who die with Passion mode's dominance (Rajas Guna ) take birth among the people who are attached and driven by worldly actions.

Whereas people who die with Ignorance Mode's dominance (Tamas Guna ) will retake rebirth in the womb of animals and unintelligent people.





VERSE 14.16

karmanah sukṛitasyahuh sattvikam nirmalam phalam rajasas tu phalam duhkham ajnanam tamasah phalam

Translation :That’s why it is said that the results of the actions under the influence of the mode of goodness will always reap the results of the purest form.Actions done under the influence of the mode of passion will eventually result in pain.And the actions done under the influence of ignorance will always result in confusion.





VERSE 14.17

sattvat sanjayate jnanam rajaso lobha eva cha pramada-mohau tamaso bhavato ’jnanam eva cha

Translation :Working under the mode of goodness will give birth to wisdom and knowledge. Working under the mode of Passion will always fuel greed. And working under the mode of ignorance will give birth to negligence and illusion.





VERSE 14.18

urdhvam gachchhanti sattva-stha madhye tiṣhṭhanti rajasah jaghanya-guna-vṛitti-stha adho gachchhanti tamasah

Translation :Those who work under the influence and dominance of the mode of goodness will always rise and shine to the upward realms. Those who work under the influence of the mode of Passion will always remain in the middle (Planet Earth).And those who work under the dominance of the mode of Ignorance will always go downwards.





VERSE 14.19

nanyam gunebhyah kartaram yada draṣhṭanupashyati gunebhyash cha param vetti mad-bhavam so ’dhigachchhati

Translation :When a person can see and realizes that there are no other agents other than these three agents— Sattva, Rajas, Tamas, then that person attains my divine nature and has known the supreme.





VERSE 14.20

gunan etan atitya trin dehi deha-samudbhavan

janma-mṛityu-jara-duhkhair vimukto ’mṛitam ashnute

Translation :Only after one transcends these three modes of this material nature, one liberates from the cycle of birth, death, misery, pain, diseases and attains immortality forever.





VERSE 14.21

arjuna uvacha

kair liṅgais trin gunan etan atito bhavati prabho kim acharah katham chaitans trin gunan ativartate

Translation : Arjuna asked: O Lord, what are the attributes of people who transcend these three modes of material nature and attain liberation? How does that person act? How does that person go beyond these Gunas ?





VERSE 14.22 & 14.23

shri-bhagavan uvacha

prakasham cha pravṛittim cha moham eva cha panḍava na dveṣhṭi sampravṛittani na nivṛittani kaṅkṣhati udasina-vad asino gunair yo na vichalyate

guna vartanta ity evam yo ’vatiṣhṭhati neṅgate

Translation :The supreme lord then said: O Arjuna , the person who transcends this three-material nature never hates or loves the abundant presence of illumination (born from Sattva ), attachment (Rajas ), illusion ( Tamas ).

Nor that person hates or loves the absence of these. That person remains unwavering and steady in both the presence and absence of these three modes of nature. Because they know that it is only the modes (Guna ) that act. Hence they stay steadily and calmly established in the self.


VERSE 14.24 & 14.25

sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah sama-loṣhṭashma-kanchanah tulya-priyapriyo dhiras tulya-nindatma-sanstutih manapamanayos tulyas tulyo mitrari-pakṣhayoh sarvarambha-parityagi gunatitah sa uchyate

Translation :These people who are steady and same in happiness and sorrow; These people are content and satisfied in self; Such people see gold, stone, and clod with the same eye and consider them of equal value. These people are unchanged and steady in both pleasant and unpleasant conditions. Such people think insult and praise as equal.

Such people are the same in both honor and dishonor. They always treat friends and enemies equally. These people abandon all the mundane activities. People with all these attributes are people who have transcended the three modes of nature.





VERSE 14.26

mam cha yo ’vyabhicharena bhakti-yogena sevate sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

Translation :A person who serves me with all devotion and faith with an unwavering mind rises above these modes of nature and attains liberation.



VERSE 14.27

brahmano hi pratiṣhṭhaham amṛitasyavyayasya cha shashvatasya cha dharmasya sukhasyaikantikasya cha

Translation :I am the foundation of this formless Brahman, immortal and everlasting. Who is the foundation of eternal Dharma and eternal supreme bliss.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 15

PATH TO ATTAIN THE SUPEREME

(PURUSHOTTAM YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna explains the material nature in- depth so that Arjuna can understand it and detaches itself from it. Shri Krishna tells Arjuna that he needs to detach himself from the

material world if he wants to attain liberation. Once a person follows, what Lord Krishna explains in this chapter, that person will reach the divine abode of the supreme and never come back to this material world again.





VERSE 15.1

shri-bhagavan uvacha

urdhva-mulam adhah-shakham ashvattham prahur avyayam chhandansi yasya parnani yas tam veda sa veda-vit

Translation :The Supreme Lord Krishna said: It’s been told that there eternal ashvatth tree (Banyan Tree). That banyan tree has roots above, and the leaves below, and its leaves represent Vedic Mantras . The one who knows about this secret tree knows Vedas.


VERSE 15.2

adhash chordhvaṁ prasṛitās tasya shākhā guna-pravṛiddhā viṣhaya-pravālāḥ adhash cha mūlāny anusantatāni karmānubandhīni manuṣhya-loke

Translation :The branches of this banyan tree grows and spread both upwards and downwards. And it is nurtured by the three modes of material nature.

The twigs represent the sense objects, and the roots of the tree that hang downwards causes the binding and flow of Karma in Human society.


VERSE 15.3 & 15.4

na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate nanto na chadir na cha sampratishtha ashvattham enam su-virudha-mulam asanga-shastrena dridhena chhittva tatah padam tat parimargitavyam yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyah tam eva chadyam puruṣham prapadye yatah pravrittih prasrita purani

Translation :No one can perceive this banyan tree's real form, and no one can tell the beginning, end, or its existence. But to liberate from this karmic cycle, one must cut the connection from this tree with an axe. One can only attain liberation with the help of an axe of detachment. Then that person needs to find out where the supreme soul resides by going to that place and taking refuge there; no one ever returns.





VERSE 15.5

nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosha adhyatma-nitya vinivritta-kamah

dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-sanjnair gachchhanty amudhah padam avyayam tat

Translation :People who are liberated from pride and delusion, who have given up on bad associations and evil deeds, have dedicated their lives to spiritual practices. Those Who are liberated from serving and gratifying their senses have transcended from the dualities of pain and pleasure. Such wise and liberated persons attain my supreme eternal abode.


VERSE 15.6

na tad bhasayate suryo na shashanko na pavakah yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama

Translation :My supreme eternal abode cannot be illuminated by the sun, moon, or fire. Once a person comes to my abode, that person never returns to the karmic cycle.





VERSE 15.7

mamaivansho jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah manah-shashthanindriyani prakriti-sthani karshati

Translation :The living creatures present in this material world are eternal particles of mine. But because of the material nature's hurdled nature, these creatures are struggling with their six senses, including the mind.





VERSE 15.8

mamaivansho jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah manah-shashthanindriyani prakriti-sthani karshati

Translation :The way wind carries the fragrances from its sources to other places. Similarly, the soul carries the mind and the senses along with it, from one material body to another.





VERSE 15.9

shrotram chakshuh sparshanam cha rasanam ghranam eva cha

adhishthaya manash chayam vishayan upasevate

Translation :The living creatures enjoy the sensory perceptions of the ear, tongue, skin, nose, and eyes, which are grouped around the mind.

VERSE 15.10

utkramantam sthitam vapi bhuñjanam va gunanvitam vimuḍha nanupashyanti pashyanti jñana-chakshushah

Translation :The Ignorant people don’t consider the soul and its existence and only gratify their senses. Not even at the time when the soul leaves the materialistic body. Those who have the eyes of knowledge can see this clearly.





VERSE 15.11

yatanto yoginash chainam pashyanty atmany avasthitam yatanto ‘py akritatmano nainam pashyanty achetasah

Translation :The Striving and Sincere Yogis know that the soul resides within the body. Those who Lack this understanding can never perceive the soul, no matter how hard they strive.





VERSE 15.12

yad aditya-gatam tejo jagad bhasayate ’khilam

yach chandramasi yach chagnau tat tejo viddhi mamakam

Translation :You must know that I am the light of the sun and the moon; also I am the energy that lightens up the entire solar system.





VERSE 15.13

gam avishya cha bhutani dharayamy aham ojasa pushnami chaushadhih sarvah somo bhutva rasatmakah

Translation :With the potency I have, I penetrate and permeate the entire earth. I nurture all the living creatures by becoming the moon and provide the essence of life.


VERSE 15.14

aham vaishvanaro bhutva praninam deham ashritah pranapana-samayuktah pachamy annam chatur-vidham

Translation :It’s me who serves as the fire used for the digestion in the stomach of the living creatures, and it’s me who unites with the incoming and outgoing breaths to digest all types of food quickly.


VERSE 15.15

sarvasya chaham hridi sannivishto mattah smritir jñanam apohanam cha vedaish cha sarvair aham eva vedyo vedanta-krid veda-vid eva chaham

Translation :It’s me who resides in the heart of all living creatures, and it’s me from where Knowledge, memory, and forgetfulness arise. It’s me alone who the Vedas can know; I am the knower and the author of Vedanta .





VERSE 15.16

dvav imau purushau loke ksharash chakshara eva cha ksharah sarvani bhutani kuta-stho ’kshara uchyate

Translation :There are two types of beings: The Kshar (Perishable and Fallible) and the Akshara (Imperishable and Infallible). The Perishable exists in the material world, whereas the Imperishable exist in the Spiritual Realm.

VERSE 15.17

uttamah purushas tv anyah paramatmety udahritah yo loka-trayam avishya bibharty avyaya ishvarah

Translation :Yet, Supreme divine consciousness exists in all the planetary systems (Upper, Middle, and Lower) and maintains all of them.





VERSE 15.18

yasmat ksharam atito ’ham aksharad api chottamah ato ’smi loke vede cha prathitah purushottamah

Translation :I am transcendental to both the realms, Fallible and Infallible. That’s why I am celebrated and glorified in Vedas and Smritis as the Supreme Divine Consciousness.





VERSE 15.19

yo mam evam asammuḍho janati purushottamam sa sarva-vid bhajati mam sarva-bhavena bharata

Translation :O Arjuna , those who know me and perceive me as the Supreme Divine Consciousness, those people have the absolute knowledge. Such people worship me with all their hearts.





VERSE 15.20

iti guhyatamam shastram idam uktam mayanagha

etad buddhva buddhiman syat krita-krityash cha bharata

Translation :O Arjuna , I now have explained the most important principle of Shastra and Vedic Scriptures to you. By understanding this principle,a person attains enlightenment, wisdom,and perfection.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 16

THE TWO CHOICES

(DAIVASURA SAMPAD VIBHAG YOGA





I n this chapter, Lord Krishna explains the two different types of human nature—Demonic and Saintly. What are different modes of material nature that contribute to a saintly nature and demonic nature how an individual can attract godlike qualities and eventually lead to the realization of god.

He also tells Arjuna about how an individual with demonic nature will end up in hell-like existence. Lord Krishna also mentions the importance of the holy scriptures and how they help shape an individual's life.





VERSE 16.1, 16.2 & 16.3

shri-bhagavan uvacha

abhayam sattva-sanshuddhir jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih danam damash cha yajnash cha svadhyayas tapa arjavam ahinsa satyam akrodhas tyagah shantir apaishunam

daya bhuteshv aloluptvam mardavam hrir achapalam tejah kshama dhritih shaucham adroho nati-manita bhavanti sampadam daivim abhijatasya bharata

Translation :The Supreme Lord Shri Krishna then said: O Bharata , There are various saintly virtues of those born with divine nature. Those holy virtues are— Fearlessness, absorption in spiritual wisdom, Charity, Purity of mind, Absence of anger, Charity, control of senses, non-violence, moderation, Truthfulness, peaceful nature, modesty, patience, Dislike towards fault-finding compassion towards other living creatures, greediness for material possessions, Lack of disloyalty, Vigor, Bravery, Cleanliness, Lack of hatred towards people, absence of egotism.





VERSE 16.4

dambho darpo ’bhimanash cha krodhah parushyam eva cha ajnanam chabhijatasya partha sampadam asurim

Translation : O Partha , people who possess impious nature are hypocrite, arrogant, full of anger, Ignorant, excessive pride, and harshness.





VERSE 16.5

daivi sampad vimokshaya nibandhayasuri mata

ma shuchah sampadam daivim abhijato ’si panḍava

Translation :These divine virtues of a deva lead a person to the path of liberation. Simultaneously, the person who has demonic qualities causes the bondage with the material nature. O Arjuna , don’t worry, as you’re born with the nature of deva.





VERSE 16.6

dvau bhuta-sargau loke ’smin daiva asura eva cha daivo vistarashah prokta asuram partha me shrinu

Translation :O Partha , there are two types of beings in this world— The first type has the qualities of a Devas , and the second has the qualities of Asuras .

O Arjuna , I have explained the qualities of Devas to you. Now I will be explaining to you the qualities of an Asuras .



VERSE 16.7

pravrittim cha nivrittim cha jana na vidur asurah

na shaucham napi chacharo na satyam teshu vidyate

Translation :People born with the virtues of Asuras or Demonic Nature can’t comprehend the difference between what actions are right and what actions are not right. Hence, they aren’t pure, not truthful, and have no proper behavior.





VERSE 16.8

asatyam apratishtham te jagad ahur anishvaram aparaspara-sambhutam kim anyat kama-haitukam

Translation : Asuras claim that “The world is without Absolute knowledge, Without any moral order and any presence of divine soul.” They believe that the creation of everything started from the union of opposite sexes, and life has no higher purpose other than sex.





VERSE 16.9

etam drishtim avashtabhya nashtatmano ’lpa-buddhayah prabhavanty ugra-karmanah kshayaya jagato ’hitah

Translation :With such a view, these misguided souls, with small intelligence and cruel Karmas ; Engage in activities that lead to the destruction of the world


VERSE 16.10

kamam ashritya dushpuram dambha-mana-madanvitah mohad grihitvasad-grahan pravartante ’shuchi-vratah

Translation : Attached to their greedy desires, absorbed in excessive pride and arrogance; Such people attract bewilderment and dishonesty.


VERSE 16.11

chintam aparimeyam cha pralayantam upashritah kamopabhoga-parama etavad iti nishchitah

Translation :They are always surrounded by endless anxiety until their death. They believe that fulfilling their greed, accumulating wealth, and gratifying selfish desires is the ultimate purpose of life.





VERSE 16.12

asha-pasha-shatair baddhah kama-krodha-parayanah ihante kama-bhogartham anyayenartha-sanchayan

Translation :Absorbed and bound by the hundreds of desires and driven by emotions of lust and anger, for the gratification of senses, they accumulate wealth from the unfair means.





VERSE 16.13, 16.14 & 16.15

idam adya maya labdham imam prapsye manoratham idam astidam api me bhavishyati punar dhanam

asau maya hatah shatrur hanishye chaparan api ishvaro ’ham aham bhogi siddho ’ham balavan sukhi aḍhyo ’bhijanavan asmi ko ’nyo ’sti sadrisho maya yakshye dasyami modishya ity ajnana-vimohitah

Translation :Such persons with demonic nature are never satisfied by the accumulation of wealth; they think, “I have acquired so much wealth today, now I must fulfill my other desires. This acquired wealth is mine, and I will acquire more wealth tomorrow.

I have destroyed my enemy, and now it’s time for me to eliminate some more enemies. I am a god and a controller; I am the enjoyer, and I am perfect and powerful. I am wealthy, who else is there who is equal to me, I shall practice sacrifices to the celestial deities, give charities and then enjoy!”. Hence it shows that they are deluded and Ignorant.



VERSE 16.16

aneka-chitta-vibhranta moha-jala-samavritah prasaktah kama-bhogeshu patanti narake ’shuchau

Translation :People with demonic nature are always off track with such imaginations and are still surrounded by a network of delusions. Absorbed in gratifying their senses, they descend to hell.





VERSE 16.17

atma-sambhavitah stabdha dhana-mana-madanvitah yajante nama-yajnais te dambhenavidhi-purvakam

Translation :Such egotistical and stubborn beings, Absorbed in excessive pride and arrogance because of their wealth. They perform the sacrifices in name only, against Dharma and with no regard to scriptures' rituals.





VERSE 16.18

ahankaram balam darpam kamam krodham cha sanshritah mam atma-para-deheshu pradvishanto ’bhyasuyakah

Translation :They’re blinded by arrogance, lusty desires, anger, egotism, and strength. People with demonic nature hate me, and the presence of demonic within them abuses my presence.


VERSE 16.19 & 16.20

tan aham dvishatah kruran sansareshu naradhaman kshipamy ajasram ashubhan asurishv eva yonishu asurim yonim apanna muḍha janmani janmani

mam aprapyaiva kaunteya tato yanty adhamam gatim

Translation :Such cruel and envious people take birth in the womb of people with similar nature because of the Karmic cycles' bondage. People with such virtues will take birth again and again in the same womb and always fail to attain the highest abode. And then they will fall to the most loathsome destinations.





VERSE 16.21

tri-vidham narakasyedam dvaram nashanam atmanah kamah krodhas tatha lobhas tasmad etat trayam tyajet

Translation :Three paths lead the soul to the lower destinations and hell— Lust, Greed, and Anger.Therefore, one must give up these three.





VERSE 16.22

etair vimuktah kaunteya tamo-dvarais tribhir narah acharaty atmanah shreyas tato yati param gatim

Translation :Those who are free themselves from these three emotions leads their soul towards the supreme abode.





VERSE 16.23

yah shastra-vidhim utsrijya vartate kama-karatah na sa siddhim avapnoti na sukham na param gatim

Translation :Those who act under the influence of these impulses of emotions, Neglect the rules mentioned in Vedas. That person never attains perfection, nor bliss, and never attains supreme abode in life.





VERSE 16.24

tasmach chhastram pramanam te karyakarya-vyavasthitau jnatva shastra-vidhanoktam karma kartum iharhasi

Translation : Therefore, let the scriptures and Vedas be the authority and influence in your life. Understand and absorb the scriptural knowledge and teachings and then lead your life accordingly .





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 17

FAITH

(SHRADDHA TRAYA VIBHAG YOGA)





I n this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna goes deeper into the subject of faith. He tells Arjuna that faith resides in each human, and only the color of the faith varies, based on the nature of the person's mind. And based on the color of faith, the quality of the life of that

individual is determined. Lord Krishna also discusses different types of food and their effect on human beings' nature. He also discusses sacrifice and austerities of mind, body, and speech.





VERSE 17.1

arjuna uvacha

ye shastra-vidhim utsrijya yajante shraddhayanvitah tesham nishtha tu ka krishna sattvam aho rajas tamah

Translation : Arjuna said: O Lord Shri Krishna , what happens to those who disregard the order and injunctions of Vedas, yet worship with faith and devotion, such worship considered be in which modes of Ignorance, Goodness or Passion?





VERSE 17.2

shri-bhagavan uvacha

tri-vidha bhavati shraddha dehinam sa svabhava-ja sattviki rajasi chaiva tamasi cheti tam shriṇu

Translation :Every human being takes birth with faith; The faith with which they’re born is of three different types—Sattvic, Rajasic, or Tamasic . Now please hear about this.





VERSE 17.3

sattvanurupa sarvasya shraddha bhavati bharata

shraddha-mayo ‘yam purusho yo yach-chhraddhah sa eva sah

Translation :O Bharata , based on their nature of consciousness of mind, a particular type of faith develops over time. The nature of faith hence determines what the person is.





VERSE 17.4

yajante sattvika devan yaksha-rakshansi rajasah pretan bhuta-gaṇansh chanye yajante tamasa janah

Translation :Those in the mode of goodness and have developed the faith will worship the celestial deities. Those who have the mode of passion and have faith will worship their ancestors' spirits..Whereas those influenced by Ignorance's mode will worship the Ghosts, Spirits, and Demons.





VERSE 17.5 & 17.6

ashastra-vihitam ghoram tapyante ye tapo janah dambhahankara-sanyuktah kama-raga-balanvitah karshayantah sharira-stham bhuta-gramam achetasah

mam chaivantah sharira-stham tan viddhy asura-nishchayan

Translation : Some individuals influenced by egotism and hypocrisy perform several rituals and practices that are not based on Vedas' s wisdom and knowledge. Driven by the desires, lust, and attachments, they torture their own physical body as well as me—who resides within their body. Know such individuals as Asuras .



VERSE 17.7

aharas tv api sarvasya tri-vidho bhavati priyah

yajñas tapas tatha danam tesham bhedam imam shriṇu

Translation :The food that people eat and enjoy, the rituals, and sacrifices are also three different types. Now listen to me about the distinctions between them.





VERSE 17.8

ayuh-sattva-balarogya-sukha-priti-vivardhanah rasyah snigdhah sthira hridya aharah sattvika-priyah

Translation :People influenced by the mode of Goodness prefer foods that increase one’s life energy, strength, health, satisfaction, and happiness. Such food types are Juicy, Luscious, Nutritious, and Naturally tasty.





VERSE 17.9

katv-amla-lavaṇaty-ushṇa- tikshṇa-ruksha-vidahinah ahara rajasasyeshta duhkha-shokamaya-pradah

Translation :Food that is too bitter, too spicy, too sour, very hot, too salty, dry is very dear to people influenced by the mode of passion. Such foods always produce diseases, pain, and sorrow.





VERSE 17.10

yata-yamam gata-rasam puti paryushitam cha yat uchchhishtam api chamedhyam bhojanam tamasa-priyam

Translation :Food that is overcooked, stale, polluted, tasteless, foul-smelling, and impure is dear to the people who are motivated and influenced by Ignorance's mode.





VERSE 17.11

aphalakankshibhir yajño vidhi-drishto ya ijyate yashtavyam eveti manah samadhaya sa sattvikah

Translation :Sacrifices that are practiced and performed according to the rituals mentioned in the Vedas and scriptures, without any expectations of rewards, with firm determination are said to be done in mode of goodness.





VERSE 17.12

abhisandhaya tu phalam dambhartham api chaiva yat ijyate bharata-shreshtha tam yajñam viddhi rajasam

Translation :O best of Bharata Dynasty, the sacrifices performed with an intent of pride, selfish intent, and own benefits are considered the sacrifices done in the mode of passion.





VERSE 17.13

vidhi-hinam asrishtannam mantra-hinam adakshiṇam shraddha-virahitam yajñam tamasam parichakshate

Translation :Sacrifices done disregarding and disrespecting the Vedas, without offering any food, without chanting hymns, without making any donations, is considered as the sacrifices made in the mode of Ignorance.





VERSE 17.14

deva-dwija-guru-prajña- pujanam shaucham arjavam brahmacharyam ahinsa cha shariram tapa uchyate

Translation :Worship the supreme consciousness, the Brahmins , the wise, the spiritual teachers, and the elders — Do this with purity, cleanliness, celibacy, sincerity, and non-violence.





VERSE 17.15

anudvega-karam vakyam satyam priya-hitam cha yat svadhyayabhyasanam chaiva van-mayam tapa uchyate

Translation :Words that don’t cause pain, sorrow and are truthful, pleasing, and beneficial for others; Along with the regular recitation of Vedas—All of this is considered austerity of speech.



VERSE 17.16

manah-prasadah saumyatvam maunam atma-vinigrahah bhava-sanshuddhir ity etat tapo manasam uchyate

Translation :The austerity of mind is silence, gentleness, self-control, and purity of goals and ambitions.





VERSE 17.17

shraddhaya paraya taptam tapas tat tri-vidham naraih aphalakankshibhir yuktaih sattvikam parichakshate

Translation :When an individual takes up these three kinds of austerity with firm determination and without any selfish motives, they can be considered Goodness mode.





VERSE 17.18

satkara-mana-pujartham tapo dambhena chaiva yat kriyate tad iha proktam rajasam chalam adhruvam

Translation :When an individual performs Austerities with the intention of gaining pride, honor, and fame, such austerities are considered to be done in the mode of Passion. The rewards of such austerities are unstable and temporary.





VERSE 17.19

muḍha-graheṇatmano yat piḍaya kriyate tapah parasyotsadanartham va tat tamasam udahritam

Translation :Austerities that are performed without any knowledge and done with confusion that involves torturing, disrespecting, and harming self or others, such austerities are considered to be done in the mode of Ignorance.





VERSE 17.20

datavyam iti yad danam diyate ‘nupakariṇe

deshe kale cha patre cha tad danam sattvikam smritam

Translation :Without any selfish motive and intention without any expectations, charities and donations given to others are made in the mode of Goodness.





VERSE 17.21

yat tu pratyupakarartham phalam uddishya va punah diyate cha pariklishtam tad danam rajasam smritam

Translation :Charities and donations done with expectations and selfish returns are said to be done in the mode of Passion.





VERSE 17.22

adesha-kale yad danam apatrebhyash cha diyate asat-kritam avajñatam tat tamasam udahritam

Translation :Charities made to the unworthy persons, at the wrong place, and at the wrong time, without any respect, are said to be done in mode of Ignorance.





VERSE 17.23

om tat sad iti nirdesho brahmaṇas tri-vidhah smritah brahmaṇas tena vedash cha yajñash cha vihitah pura

Translation :The words “Om Tat Sat” are said to be the representations of the Absolute Truth, according to the Vedas. The process of sacrifices, saints, and Vedas is manifested from these three words only.





VERSE 17.24

tasmad om ity udahritya yajña-dana-tapah-kriyah pravartante vidhanoktah satatam brahma-vadinam

Translation :Those who perform sacrifices, give charities, perform austerity should always begin it by chanting the syllable “Om” first.





VERSE 17.25

tad ity anabhisandhaya phalam yajña-tapah-kriyah dana-kriyash cha vividhah kriyante moksha-kankshibhih

Translation :Those who don’t seek any rewards and have no expectations other than liberation from the material world must utter the word “Tat” while performing sacrifices, austerities, rituals, and charities.





VERSE 17.26 & 17.27

sad-bhave sadhu-bhave cha sad ity etat prayujyate prashaste karmaṇi tatha sach-chhabdah partha yujyate yajñe tapasi dane cha sthitih sad iti chochyate

karma chaiva tad-arthiyam sad ity evabhidhiyate

Translation :The word "Sat" represents the nature of Absolute and the Goodness. O Arjuna, therefore, a word used to describe virtuous actions. Being steady and absorbed in sacrifice, charity and austerity can be explained by the word "Sat." Any actions taken for the Supreme's purpose are also called the "Sat."


VERSE 17.28

ashraddhaya hutam dattam tapas taptam kritam cha yat asad ity uchyate partha na cha tat pretya no iha

Translation :O Partha , any actions, Charities, and Sacrifices did without faith can be considered as “Asat.” Such efforts have no fruitive results in this world or the next one.





✽✽✽





CHAPTER 18

PERFECTION AND FREEDOM

(Moksha Sanyas Yoga )




T his is the last chapter of Bhagwad Gita and also the longest one. In this chapter, Lord Shri Krishna educates Arjuna about renouncing desires and renouncing actions.

Shri Krishna recommends a different kind of renunciation, in which one doesn't need to renounce his/her prescribed duties. In this chapter, Shri Krishna also explains in detail the qualities and traits of the people who have realized the Brahman . Eventually, he says that only with loving devotion towards Lord Shri Krishna can one attain the divine personality.

He suggests dedicating all the actions to him and gets completely absorbed in the Lord Shri Krishna . When an individual makes Lord Shri Krishna his/her ultimate goal, that person can easily overcome this material world's challenges and hardships with ease.

On the other side, Sanjaya, who was narrating these dialogues all to King Dhritarashtra , is bliss and ecstasy. He tells the king about his joy and most profound gratitude for witnessing this sacred conversation between the supreme lord and the warrior Arjuna.





VERSE 18.1

arjuna uvacha

sannyasasya maha-baho tattvam ichchhami veditum tyagasya cha hrishikesha prithak keshi-nishudana

Translation : Arjuna said: O Mighty Armed One, O Krishna , I wish to understand the true nature of Sanyas (Renunciation of actions done for personal benefits) and Tyag (Renunciation of all kinds of actions).O Krishna , I also wish to understand the difference between them.





VERSE 18.2

shri-bhagavan uvacha

kamyanam karmaṇam nyasam sannyasam kavayo viduh sarva-karma-phala-tyagam prahus tyagam vichakshaṇah

Translation : Sanyasis when a person gives up the actions done for selfish benefits; Whereas Tyag is when a person gives up the desire to gain fruits of all the efforts that he has done.



VERSE 18.3

tyajyam dosha-vad ity eke karma prahur manishiṇah yajña-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyam iti chapare

Translation :Some scholars believe that all types of actions should be given up and considered evil, but acts of charity, sacrifice, and penance must never be abandoned.





VERSE 18.4

nishchayam shriṇu me tatra tyage bharata-sattama tyago hi purusha-vyaghra tri-vidhah samprakirtitah

Translation :O Best of Bharata Now listens to my conclusion concerning the subject of renunciation. O tiger among men, there are three kinds of renunciation.





VERSE 18.5

yajna-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyam karyam eva tat yajno danam tapash chaiva pavanani manishiṇam

Translation :One must never abandon types of renunciation based upon sacrifice, austerity, and charity. One must do such kinds of actions, even the wise ones.



VERSE 18.6

etany api tu karmaṇi sangam tyaktva phalani cha kartavyaniti me partha nishchitam matam uttamam

Translation : O Arjuna , My Verdict is that one must not do these actions of renunciation with an expectation or attachment of gaining fruitful rewards.





VERSE 18.7

niyatasya tu sannyasah karmaṇo nopapadyate mohat tasya parityagas tamasah parikirtitah

Translation :One must never give up on one prescribed duties. Giving up one’s prescribed duties is usually done because of acting in ignorance.





VERSE 18.8

duhkham ity eva yat karma kaya-klesha-bhayat tyajet sa kritva rajasam tyagam naiva tyaga-phalam labhet

Translation :Giving up on duties when they seem complicated, undoable, or physically discomforting is because of taking actions in the mode of passion. This kind of renunciation is never fruitful.



VERSE 18.9

karyam ity eva yat karma niyatam kriyate arjuna sangam tyaktva phalam chaiva sa tyagah sattviko matah

Translation :When prescribed activities and actions are done, by giving up on the desire or expectations of any fruitful reward, then those actions can be considered to be done in the mode of goodness.





VERSE 18.10

na dveshty akushalam karma kushale nanushajjate tyagi sattva-samavishto medhavi chhinna-sanshayah

Translation :The wise ones will never get too attached to pleasant tasks and not get resentful when performing unpleasant and challenging tasks.





VERSE 18.11

na hi deha-bhrita shakyam tyaktum karmaṇy asheshatah yas tu karma-phala-tyagi sa tyagity abhidhiyate

Translation :Those people who have accepted this material body and this delusional reality, for them giving up on actions entirely is impossible.

However, when a person entirely renounces the results of their actions and detaches themselves from the outcomes or the results' expectations, one can say that the person can be considered a truly renounced person.


VERSE 18.12

anishtam ishtam mishram cha tri-vidham karmaṇah phalam bhavaty atyaginam pretya na tu sannyasinam kvachit

Translation :Those who don't accept renunciation and are attached to their actions' fruitive results, for such people, results are of three different types— Pleasant, Unpleasant, and Mixed. But those who become Tyagi and renounce the fruits of their actions have no such different kinds of results.





VERSE 18.13

panchaitani maha-baho karaṇani nibodha me sankhye kritante proktani siddhaye sarva-karmaṇam

Translation :O Arjuna, learn from me about the five factors mentioned in Vedanta for the accomplishment of all kinds of actions.





VERSE 18.14

adhishthanam tatha karta karaṇam cha prithag-vidham vividhash cha prithak cheshta daivam chaivatra panchamam

Translation :There are five factors of action — The body, the performer or doer, All the senses, Different kinds of endeavours, and the Divine.





VERSE 18.15 & VERSE 18.16

sharira-van-manobhir yat karma prarabhate narah nyayyam va viparitam va panchaite tasya hetavah tatraivam sati kartaram atmanam kevalam tu yah pashyaty akrita-buddhitvan na sa pashyati durmatih

Translation :These Five are sources and contributory factors of all types of actions, whether good or bad. Those who don’t understand this think that they are the doer of the actions, and with their inferior and impure intellect, are unable to perceive the things as they are.





VERSE 18.17

yasya nahankrito bhavo buddhir yasya na lipyate hatva ‘pi sa imal lokan na hanti na nibadhyate

Translation :Those who are liberated from false ego and their intellect is detached — Even if they slay someone on the battlefield, they are not killing and are not bound by their actions.





VERSE 18.18

jnanam jneyam parijnata tri-vidha karma-chodana karaṇam karma karteti tri-vidhah karma-sangrahah

Translation :The three factors that induce action are — Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower. The three constituents of actions are— The instrument of war, the activity, and the activity's performer.





VERSE 18.19

jnanam karma cha karta cha tridhaiva guṇa-bhedatah prochyate guṇa-sankhyane yathavach chhriṇu tany api

Translation :According to the philosophy of Sankhya , the knowledge, the action, and the performer of the action, classified based on the three modes of material nature. Now listen to these from me.



VERSE 18.20

sarva-bhuteshu yenaikam bhavam avyayam ikshate avibhaktam vibhakteshu taj jnanam viddhi sattvikam

Translation :Knowledge is to be considered in the mode of goodness when by that knowledge, one can see the eternal reality in the wide variety of living beings.





VERSE 18.21

prithaktvena tu yaj jnanam nana-bhavan prithag-vidhan vetti sarveshu bhuteshu taj jnanam viddhi rajasam

Translation :The knowledge by which one can see different living entities in a wide variety shows that everything is connected and acts as an individual. That knowledge is considered as a mode of passion.





VERSE 18.22

yat tu kritsna-vad ekasmin karye saktam ahaitukam atattvartha-vad alpam cha tat tamasam udahritam

Translation :The knowledge in which one is attached to actions because of incomplete knowledge and trivial pursuits can be considered knowledge in the mode of ignorance.



VERSE 18.23

niyatam sanga-rahitam araga-dveshatah kritam aphala-prepsuna karma yat tat sattvikam uchyate

Translation :Actions that are performed in line with the absolute knowledge mentioned in the scriptures, without any attachments to the outcomes or the fruitive results, can be considered the actions done in the goodness mode.





VERSE 18.24

yat tu kamepsuna karma sahankareṇa va punah kriyate bahulayasam tad rajasam udahritam

Translation :Actions performed influenced by selfish desires, acted with pride, and done with extreme stress, and hard work are said to be done in the mode of passion.





VERSE 18.25

anubandham kshayam hinsam anapekshya cha paurusham mohad arabhyate karma yat tat tamasam uchyate

Translation :Actions performed in the mode of ignorance stems from delusion, without considering one’s ability and without considering the loss and injury it can cause to self and others.





VERSE 18.26

mukta-sango ‘naham-vadi dhrity-utsaha-samanvitah siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarah karta sattvika uchyate

Translation : When the performer of actions is liberated from egotism, detached from the actions' results, and unaffected by success or failure, that person can be considered in the goodness mode.





VERSE 18.27

ragi karma-phala-prepsur lubdho hinsatmako ‘shuchih harsha-shokanvitah karta rajasah parikirtitah

Translation :When the performer of actions craves for their actions' desired results, they become greedy, violent natured, immoral, and easily affected by joy and sorrow. Then that person can be considered in the mode of actions.





VERSE 18.28

anubandham kshayam hinsam anapekshya cha paurusham mohad arabhyate karma yat tat tamasam uchyate

Translation :A performer who is undisciplined, stubborn, rude, dishonest,extremely lazy, depressed, and a procrastinator is said to be working in the mode of Ignorance.





VERSE 18.29

buddher bhedam dhritesh chaiva guṇatas tri-vidham shriṇu prochyamanam ashesheṇa prithaktvena dhananjaya

Translation :O Arjuna , Here me now, As I describe to you in detail about the different kinds of intellect and determination as per three distinct modes of material nature .





VERSE 18.30

pravrittim cha nivrittim cha karyakarye bhayabhaye bandham moksham cha ya vetti buddhih sa partha sattviki

Translation :When the intellect knows the difference between what’s should be made and what’s shouldn’t be done, what’s the duty and what’s not a duty, what’s to be scared of and what’s not to be scared of, What’s enslavement, and what’s liberation.





VERSE 18.31

yaya dharmam adharmam cha karyam chakaryam eva cha ayathavat prajanati buddhih sa partha rajasi

Translation :When the intellect cannot know the difference between Dharma and Adharma , not able to see the difference between what is right.





VERSE 18.32

adharmam dharmam iti ya manyate tamasavrita sarvarthan viparitansh cha buddhih sa partha tamasi

Translation :The intellect is in darkness and mode of ignorance when it sees Dharma as Adharma and Adharma as Dharma .


VERSE 18.33

dhritya yaya dharayate manah-praṇendriya-kriyah yogenavyabhichariṇya dhritih sa partha sattviki

Translation : The determination is said to be in the mode of goodness when one strictly controls their mind, senses, and the life-air by harnessing Yoga.





VERSE 18.34

yaya tu dharma-kamarthan dhritya dharayate ‘rjuna prasangena phalakankshi dhritih sa partha rajasi

Translation :The determination is said to be in the mode of passion when one holds to their duty and Dharma because of worldly desires and wealth acquisition.





VERSE 18.35

yaya svapnam bhayam shokam vishadam madam eva cha na vimunchati durmedha dhritih sa partha tamasi

Translation :The determination is said to be in the mode of ignorance when the person cannot give up on excessive sleep, fear, grieve, misery and egotism.





VERSE 18.36

dhritya yaya dharayate manah-praṇendriya-kriyah yogenavyabhichariṇya dhritih sa partha sattviki

Translation :O Best of Bharata, Now listen to the three types of happiness, leading to the end of all the sufferings.





VERSE 18.37

yat tad agre visham iva pariṇame ‘mritopamam

tat sukham sattvikam proktam atma-buddhi-prasada-jam

Translation :It tastes bitter at first but is nectar at the end as it is in the goodness mode and awakens one to self-knowledge.





VERSE 18.38

vishayendriya-sanyogad yat tad agre ’mritopamam pariṇame visham iva tat sukham rajasam smritam

Translation :The Happiness caused by the senses and the sense objects serves as nectar initially but is poisonous in the end. That is also known as Happiness in the mode of passion.





VERSE 18.39

yad agre chanubandhe cha sukham mohanam atmanah nidralasya-pramadottham tat tamasam udahritam

Translation :Happiness is considered in Ignorance's mode when it arises from excessive sleep, laziness, negligence, and delusions.





VERSE 18.40

na tad asti prithivyam va divi deveshu va punah

sattvam prakriti-jair muktam yad ebhih syat tribhir guṇaih

Translation :There is a living being in this material nature, heavenly abodes, and earth, which is liberated from the influence of these three modes of nature.





VERSE 18.41

brahmaṇa-kshatriya-visham shudraṇam cha parantapa karmaṇi pravibhaktani svabhava-prabhavair guṇaih

Translation :O Arjuna , Conqueror of enemies, The duties of Brahmins, Kshatriya, Vaishyas, and Shudras are assigned in line with their Guna (Qualities one possesses).





VERSE 18.42

shamo damas tapah shaucham kshantir arjavam eva cha jnanam vijnanam astikyam brahma-karma svabhava-jam

Translation : The natural qualities of a person who is considered as Brahmin are—Self-control, Calmness, austerity, wisdom, knowledge, honesty, integrity, and faith in the divine.


VERSE 18.43

shauryam tejo dhritir dakshyam yuddhe chapy apalayanam danam ishvara-bhavash cha kshatram karma svabhava-jam

Translation :Qualities of a person who can be considered a Kshatriya are— Bravery, Heroism, Power, Attitude to never retreat from the battle, generosity for charity, and leadership qualities.





VERSE 18.44

krishi-gau-rakshya-vaṇijyam vaishya-karma svabhava-jam paricharyatmakam karma shudrasyapi svabhava-jam

Translation :The person who has the qualities to business, farming, and cow protection can be considered as Vaishyas . Those who provide services to others can be regarded as Shudras .





VERSE 18.45

sve sve karmaṇy abhiratah sansiddhim labhate narah sva-karma-niratah siddhim yatha vindati tach chhriṇu

Translation :Now listen to me, how those who perform their duties, based on the qualities they’re born with, can attain perfection.





VERSE 18.46

yatah pravrittir bhutanam yena sarvam idam tatam

sva-karmaṇa tam abhyarchya siddhim vindati manavah

Translation :By performing their duties based on the natural qualities humans possess by birth, they can worship the divine, from whom all the living beings originated and the omnipresent one.





VERSE 18.47

shreyan swa-dharmo viguṇah para-dharmat sv-anushthitat svabhava-niyatam karma kurvan napnoti kilbisham

Translation :It’s better to perform your own Dharma imperfectly than to do another’s Dharma perfectly. One can never suffer from sins when one performs one prescribed duties.





VERSE 18.48

saha-jam karma kaunteya sa-dosham api na tyajet sarvarambha hi dosheṇa dhumenagnir ivavritah

Translation :O son of Kunti , one must not give up on their prescribed duties, even though there are flaws. Some flaws encapsulate all activities; the way smoke surrounds fire.





VERSE 18.49

asakta-buddhih sarvatra jitatma vigata-sprihah naishkarmya-siddhim paramam sannyasenadhigachchhati

Translation :Those who are detached from material objects and possessions, and have mastered themselves and their mind, are liberated from the desires by practicing renunciation, do their prescribed duty, and are detached from the fruitive results.


VERSE 18.50

siddhim prapto yatha brahma tathapnoti nibodha me samasenaiva kaunteya nishtha jnanasya ya para

Translation :Now listen to me, Arjuna, how a person who has attained perfection by doing their duties can then attain Brahman.





VERSE 18.51 , VERSE 18.52 & VERSE 18.53

buddhya vishuddhaya yukto dhrityatmanam niyamya cha shabdadin vishayans tyaktva raga-dveshau vyudasya cha vivikta-sevi laghv-ashi yata-vak-kaya-manasah

dhyana-yoga-paro nityam vairagyam samupashritah ahankaram balam darpam kamam krodham parigraham vimuchya nirmamah shanto brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

Translation :With pure intellect, they control the mind, abandonment attachment to sensory pleasures, detachment towards attraction, and hatred both. Such people enjoy solitude, eat light food, and control the mind, body, and speech. They are always engaged in meditation of the divine and practice detachment.

Liberated from self-praise, violence, vanity, greed, desire to possess properties, self-indulgence, such a person is situated in calmness, such person is perfectly qualified for union with Brahman (Absolute truth).



VERSE 18.54

brahma-bhutah prasannatma na shochati na kankshati samah sarveshu bhuteshu mad-bhaktim labhate param

Translation :When a self-satisfied person realizes the transcendental Brahman, that person neither grieves nor rejoices. Being equal towards all human beings, such a person attains devotion in me.





VERSE 18.55

bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yash chasmi tattvatah tato mam tattvato jnatva vishate tad-anantaram

Translation :Through such loving devotion to me, one can know me in reality. Thus, after knowing me, that person can enter into my reality.





VERSE 18.56

sarva-karmaṇy api sada kurvaṇo mad-vyapashrayah mat-prasadad avapnoti shashvatam padam avyayam

Translation :However, my devotees engaged in different activities, take full shelter in me. By my grace, they attain my eternal abode.



VERSE 18.57

chetasa sarva-karmaṇi mayi sannyasya mat-parah buddhi-yogam upashritya mach-chittah satatam bhava

Translation :Consciously dedicate all your activities to me; consider me your supreme goal. Taking refuge in the devotion process, always keep your consciousness on me.





VERSE 18.58

mach-chittah sarva-durgaṇi mat-prasadat tarishyasi atha chet tvam ahankaran na shroshyasi vinankshyasi

Translation :If your consciousness is always absorbed in me, by my grace, all your troubles and obstacles will overcome if you’re still absorbed in me.





VERSE 18.59

yad ahankaram ashritya na yotsya iti manyase mithyaisha vyavasayas te prakritis tvam niyokshyati

Translation :If, because of the influence of your false ego, you think, “I will not fight.” Your decision will be useless as your material nature will force you to fight.





VERSE 18.60

swbhava-jena kaunteya nibaddhah svena karmaṇa kartum nechchhasi yan mohat karishyasy avasho ’pi tat

Translation :O Arjuna , the action you want to give up will eventually be carried out by you because of your material nature.



VERSE 18.61

ishvarah sarva-bhutanam hrid-deshe ‘rjuna tishthati bhramayan sarva-bhutani yantraruḍhani mayaya

Translation :O Arjuna , The Divine Lord resides in all living creatures' hearts. Based on the Karma of the individuals, the Supreme lord directs the wandering soul as if the individual is mounted on a machine of material energy.



VERSE 18.62

tam eva sharaṇam gachchha sarva-bhavena bharata

tat-prasadat param shantim sthanam prapsyasi shashvatam

Translation :Take refuge in him with all your love and devotion, and with the mercy of the supreme, you’ll be able to attain the supreme abode and bliss.



VERSE 18.63

iti te jnanam akhyatam guhyad guhyataram maya vimrishyaitad ashesheṇa yathechchhasi tatha kuru

Translation :I have now revealed to you the absolute knowledge that is the biggest secret. Consider it and do as you wish.



VERSE 18.64

sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah shriṇu me paramam vachah ishto ‘si me driḍham iti tato vakshyami te hitam

Translation :Listen to me, the biggest secret of all the available knowledge; I am revealing this to you as you are dearest to me.





VERSE 18.65

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru mam evaishyasi satyam te pratijane priyo ‘si me

Translation :Meditate upon my name, worship me, devote yourself to me and offer your respect to me. By doing this, you’ll undoubtedly attain me. I promise this to you, as you’re dear to me.


VERSE 18.66

sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam sharaṇam vraja aham tvam sarva-papebhyo mokshayishyami ma shuchah

Translation :Abandon all kinds of Dharma and take refuge in me. Don’t fear; I will liberate you from all sins.





VERSE 18.67

idam te natapaskyaya nabhaktaya kadachana

na chashushrushave vachyam na cha mam yo ‘bhyasutayi

Translation : Never reveal this knowledge to people who aren’t self-controlled, not devoted, not interested in listening to spiritual knowledge and wisdom, especially people who envy me.





VERSE 18.68

ya idam paramam guhyam mad-bhakteshv abhidhasyati bhaktim mayi param kritva mam evaishyaty asanshayah

Translation :The one who teaches this absolute knowledge to my devotees does the greatest act of devotion; They will surely attain me without any doubt.



VERSE 18.69

na cha tasman manushyeshu kashchin me priya-krittamah bhavita na cha me tasmad anyah priyataro bhuvi

Translation :This is the most devotional and loving service that they do for me. There will be no one dearer to me than who spreads this secret to my devotees.

VERSE 18.70

adhyeshyate cha ya imam dharmyam samvadam avayoh jnana-yajnena tenaham ishtah syam iti me matih

Translation :And I declare that those who study this sacred conversation of ours will worship me with the sacrifice of knowledge. That’s my conclusion.


VERSE 18.71

shraddhavan anasuyash cha shriṇuyad api yo narah

so ‘pi muktah shubhal lokan prapnuyat puṇya-karmaṇam

Translation :Those who listen to this wisdom from our conversation will be liberated and attain my abode with full devotion and without envy in heart.





VERSE 18.72

kachchid etach chhrutam partha tvayaikagreṇa chetasa kachchid ajnana-sammohah pranashtas te dhananjaya

Translation :O Partha, have you heard me with undivided attention? Has your bewilderment and illusion been destroyed?





VERSE 18.73

arjuna uvacha

nashto mohah smritir labdha tvat-prasadan mayachyuta sthito ‘smi gata-sandehah karishye vachanam tava

Translation : Arjuna then said, O flawless one, all my delusion is now gone by all your grace, and I have attained the state of mental equilibrium. As I am free from all the doubts, I will act as per the instructions and the knowledge you showered over me.





VERSE 18.74

sanjaya uvacha

ity aham vasudevasya parthasya cha mahatmanah samvadam imam ashrausham adbhutam roma-harshaṇam

Translation :Sanjaya said: I have heard the sacred conversation between the Lord Shri Krishna and the Mighty Arjuna. This wisdom and message are so glorious that it makes my hair stand on end.



VERSE 18.75

vyasa-prasadach chhrutavan etad guhyam aham param yogam yogeshvarat krishṇat sakshat kathayatah svayam

Translation :All by the grace of the great Veda Vyasa , I have listened to the most confidential wisdom of Yoga from the master of all Yoga , Shri Krishna himself.





VERSE 18.76 & VERSE 18.77

rajan sansmritya sansmritya samvadam imam adbhutam keshavarjunayoh puṇyam hrishyami cha muhur muhuh

tach cha sansmritya samsmritya rupam aty-adbhutam hareh vismayo ye mahan rajan hrishyami cha punah punah

Translation : As I continuously recall this tremendous and sacred conversation between Lord Shri Krishna and Arjuna , O king. I get delighted again and again. When I remember Lord Shri Krishna's extraordinary cosmic universal form, I get thrilled and fill up with joy.





VERSE 18.78

yatra yogeshvarah krishṇo yatra partho dhanur-dharah tatra shrir vijayo bhutir dhruva nitir matir mama

Translation :Whenever there’s Lord Shri Krishna , the master of yoga and, whenever there is Mighty Archer Arjuna , there will always be Abundance, Victory, Righteousness, and absolute fortune. And I am certain about this.





✽✽✽





GLOSSARY





Abhimanyu : Son of Arjuna and Subhadra; Adhibhuta: Material Manifestation; Adhiratha: Foster father of Karna; Adhiyajna: Supreme Being;

Adhyatma : Spirituality; Aditiyas: Sunshine of the sun; Agni: Fire;

Airavata: White elephant that carries deity Indra; Anant: Endless, Limitless;

Aryama : Early Hindu Deity; Ashwatthama: Son of Guru Dronacharya; Ashwini Kumars: Son of Sun god; Asuras: Demons;

Bhagawan : God;

Bhakti : Devotion;

Bharata : Ancestor of Pandavas and Kauravas; Bhrgu: One of the seven great sages in Hindu mythology;

Brahma : One of the three principle deity of Hinduism; Brahma Sutras: Sanskrit texts that summarizes the ideas present in Upnishads;

Brahspati : Sage from vedic era that use to counsel gods; Brihatsama : Brihatsama is a special Sama in the Sama Veda;

Devadatt a: Conch shell gifted to Arjuna by Varuna— deity of sky and sea;

Devas : Gods or deities;

Dharma : Righteousness;

Dhirstadyumna : Brother of Draupadi; commander in chief of Pandavas;

Draupadi : Common wife of Pandavas; Leading

female character of the epic Mahabharata; Drupada: Father of Draupadi, Dhirstadyumna and Shikhandi;

Gandharvas : Messengers between humans and gods; Ganga: Personification of the great river ganges; Garuda: Charioteer of Sun god; or An Eagle; Gayatri: Personified way of Gayatri Mantra;

Gita : Bhagavad Gita is often referred as Gita;

Gunas : Quality;

Guru : Teacher, Mentor;

Hastinapur : Capital of Kuru Kingdom; City in Uttar Pradesh, India;

Indra : God of the heavens;

Indraprastha: City of Kuru Kingdom;

Janak : King of Videha in Mithila region; Janardan: Another name for Lord Shri Krishna; Japa : Repetition of a mantra;

jiva shakti : Life force;

Jnani : one who is engaged in acquiring knowledge;

Kaamdev : God of love;

Kaamdhenu : Bovine goddess in hindu mythology;

Kapila : Ancient hindu sage;

Karm Sanyas i : Person who free himself from the external sensory pleasures;

Karma Yoga : Yoga of action without selfish motives;

Karmi : the one who tries to attain liberation by performing Vedic rituals.

Kashi : Ancient sacred city on the bank of river

ganges, Currently known as Varanasi;

Kaunteya : Son of Kunti — Another name for Arjuna; Keshav :long dark matted locks — Another name of Lord Krishna;

Kesi : Horse Demon, Killed by Lord Krishna; Kripa: Blessings;

Kshetra : Field , Area, Domain, Territory; Kshetrajna: Knower of the field;

Kunti : Mother of Pandavas;

Kurukshetra : City in state of Haryana, India where battle of Mahabharata was fought;

Madhusudhana : Slayer of Demon Madhu ;

Mahabharata : Epic battle between Pandavas and Kauravas;

Manu : According to hindu mythology; Manu is the first

Man;

Margsheersh : Ninth month in Hindu calendar;

Meru : Mountain peak in Himalayas; Narada : God sage and a travelling musician; Om: Sacred sound in Hinduism;

Om Tat Sat : unmanifested existence; Partha: Another name for Arjuna; Paundra: Conch shell of Bhima;

Prahlad : Saintly boy and one of the biggest devotee of lord Vishnu;

Prakrti : Nature or Natural form;

Prashar: Author of Vishnu purana; Puranas: Sacred ancient Indian literature; Purush: Male;

Radha : Goddess of love and lover of Lord Krishna;

Rajas: Mode of passion;

Rudras : Forms and followers of Lord Shiva; Sama Veda: One of the four principle vedas in Hinduism

Sankhya : One of the six schools of yoga in Hinduism;

Sankhya yoga : Summary of Bhagavad Gita;

Sanyas : Renunciation;

Sattva : Modes of goodness;

Satyaki: a warrior from vrishni clan; Shastra: A book of knowledge; Shikhandi: One of the main character in

Mahahbharata ; Daughter of Draupada who was later turned to an eunuch;

Shukracharya : One of the greatest sages in Hinduism; who became a guru of Asuras and Demons;

Siddhas : The one who has attained perfection;

Smritis : Symbolic synonym for number eighteen scholars;

Subhadra: Sister of Lord Krishna who was married to

Arjuna;

Sudarshana Chakra: Disc like weapon of Lord Vishnu;

Surya : Sun;

Tamas: Mode of Ignorance;

Tapasvi : ascetic ;

tattva jnana : Knowledge of fundamental truth;

Tyag : Sacrifice;

Ucchaisarva : 7 headed flying horse;

Varun : God of Sky and oceans;

Vasudev : The one who Lives everywhere—Another name of Lord Krishna

Vasuki : King of all serpents;

Vasus : Eight elemental gods that represent different elements and aspects of nature;

Vayu : Deity of winds;

Vedanta Sutras : Brahma Sutras;

Vedas : Oldest sacred Sanskrit literature;

Vedic : Related to Vedas;

Vidur : Prime minister of kingdom of kurus;

Virat : Father-in-law of Abhimanyu—Son of Arjuna;

Vishwadevas : All vedic gods;

Vrsni : Ancient Indian clan of ancestors of Yadu;

Vyasa : Author of Mahabharta;

Yadava: Cowherd clan of decedents of yadu;

Yakshas: Nature Spirits;

Yamaraj: God of death;

Yogamaya : Power of lord Krishna;

Yuyudhan : a warrior from vrishni clan—Satyaki;





✽✽✽





BIBLIOGRAPHY










